The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Princess of Mars, by Edgar Rice Burroughs
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

Title: A Princess of Mars
Author: Edgar Rice Burroughs
Release Date: June 23, 2008 [EBook #62]
Language: English

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PRINCESS OF MARS ***














[Frontispiece: With my back against a golden throne, I fought onceagain for Dejah Thoris]



A PRINCESS OF MARS

by
Edgar Rice Burroughs


To My Son Jack



FOREWORD

To the Reader of this Work:
In submitting Captain Carter's strange manuscript to you in book form,I believe that a few words relative to this remarkable personality willbe of interest.
My first recollection of Captain Carter is of the few months he spentat my father's home in Virginia, just prior to the opening of the civilwar.  I was then a child of but five years, yet I well remember thetall, dark, smooth-faced, athletic man whom I called Uncle Jack.
He seemed always to be laughing; and he entered into the sports of thechildren with the same hearty good fellowship he displayed toward thosepastimes in which the men and women of his own age indulged; or hewould sit for an hour at a time entertaining my old grandmother withstories of his strange, wild life in all parts of the world.  We allloved him, and our slaves fairly worshipped the ground he trod.
He was a splendid specimen of manhood, standing a good two inches oversix feet, broad of shoulder and narrow of hip, with the carriage of thetrained fighting man.  His features were regular and clear cut, hishair black and closely cropped, while his eyes were of a steel gray,reflecting a strong and loyal character, filled with fire andinitiative.  His manners were perfect, and his courtliness was that ofa typical southern gentleman of the highest type.
His horsemanship, especially after hounds, was a marvel and delighteven in that country of magnificent horsemen.  I have often heard myfather caution him against his wild recklessness, but he would onlylaugh, and say that the tumble that killed him would be from the backof a horse yet unfoaled.
When the war broke out he left us, nor did I see him again for somefifteen or sixteen years.  When he returned it was without warning, andI was much surprised to note that he had not aged apparently a moment,nor had he changed in any other outward way.  He was, when others werewith him, the same genial, happy fellow we had known of old, but whenhe thought himself alone I have seen him sit for hours gazing off intospace, his face set in a look of wistful longing and hopeless misery;and at night he would sit thus looking up into the heavens, at what Idid not know until I read his manuscript years afterward.
He told us that he had been prospecting and mining in Arizona part ofthe time since the war; and that he had been very successful wasevidenced by the unlimited amount of money with which he was supplied.As to the details of his life during these years he was very reticent,in fact he would not talk of them at all.
He remained with us for about a year and then went to New York, wherehe purchased a little place on the Hudson, where I visited him once ayear on the occasions of my trips to the New York market--my father andI owning and operating a string of general stores throughout Virginiaat that time.  Captain Carter had a small but beautiful cottage,situated on a bluff overlooking the river, and during one of my lastvisits, in the winter of 1885, I observed he was much occupied inwriting, I presume now, upon this manuscript.
He told me at this time that if anything should happen to him he wishedme to take charge of his estate, and he gave me a key to a compartmentin the safe which stood in his study, telling me I would find his willthere and some personal instructions which he had me pledge myself tocarry out with absolute fidelity.
After I had retired for the night I have seen him from my windowstanding in the moonlight on the brink of the bluff overlooking theHudson with his arms stretched out to the heavens as though in appeal.I thought at the time that he was praying, although I never understoodthat he was in the strict sense of the term a religious man.
Several months after I had returned home from my last visit, the firstof March, 1886, I think, I received a telegram from him asking me tocome to him at once.  I had always been his favorite among the youngergeneration of Carters and so I hastened to comply with his demand.
I arrived at the little station, about a mile from his grounds, on themorning of March 4, 1886, and when I asked the livery man to drive meout to Captain Carter's he replied that if I was a friend of theCaptain's he had some very bad news for me; the Captain had been founddead shortly after daylight that very morning by the watchman attachedto an adjoining property.
For some reason this news did not surprise me, but I hurried out to hisplace as quickly as possible, so that I could take charge of the bodyand of his affairs.
I found the watchman who had discovered him, together with the localpolice chief and several townspeople, assembled in his little study.The watchman related the few details connected with the finding of thebody, which he said had been still warm when he came upon it.  It lay,he said, stretched full length in the snow with the arms outstretchedabove the head toward the edge of the bluff, and when he showed me thespot it flashed upon me that it was the identical one where I had seenhim on those other nights, with his arms raised in supplication to theskies.
There were no marks of violence on the body, and with the aid of alocal physician the coroner's jury quickly reached a decision of deathfrom heart failure.  Left alone in the study, I opened the safe andwithdrew the contents of the drawer in which he had told me I wouldfind my instructions.  They were in part peculiar indeed, but I havefollowed them to each last detail as faithfully as I was able.
He directed that I remove his body to Virginia without embalming, andthat he be laid in an open coffin within a tomb which he previously hadhad constructed and which, as I later learned, was well ventilated.The instructions impressed upon me that I must personally see that thiswas carried out just as he directed, even in secrecy if necessary.
His property was left in such a way that I was to receive the entireincome for twenty-five years, when the principal was to become mine.His further instructions related to this manuscript which I was toretain sealed and unread, just as I found it, for eleven years; nor wasI to divulge its contents until twenty-one years after his death.
A strange feature about the tomb, where his body still lies, is thatthe massive door is equipped with a single, huge gold-plated springlock which can be opened _only from the inside_.
Yours very sincerely,
Edgar Rice Burroughs.



CONTENTS
      I  On the Arizona Hills     II  The Escape of the Dead    III  My Advent on Mars     IV  A Prisoner      V  I Elude My Watch Dog     VI  A Fight That Won Friends    VII  Child-Raising on Mars   VIII  A Fair Captive from the Sky     IX  I Learn the Language      X  Champion and Chief     XI  With Dejah Thoris    XII  A Prisoner with Power   XIII  Love-Making on Mars    XIV  A Duel to the Death     XV  Sola Tells Me Her Story    XVI  We Plan Escape   XVII  A Costly Recapture  XVIII  Chained in Warhoon    XIX  Battling in the Arena     XX  In the Atmosphere Factory    XXI  An Air Scout for Zodanga   XXII  I Find Dejah  XXIII  Lost in the Sky   XXIV  Tars Tarkas Finds a Friend    XXV  The Looting of Zodanga   XXVI  Through Carnage to Joy  XXVII  From Joy to Death XXVIII  At the Arizona Cave



ILLUSTRATIONS

With my back against a golden throne,  I fought once again for Dejah Thoris . . . . . . _Frontispiece_
I sought out Dejah Thoris in the throng of departing chariots.
She drew upon the marble floor the first map of the  Barsoomian territory I had ever seen.
The old man sat and talked with me for hours.



CHAPTER I
ON THE ARIZONA HILLS

I am a very old man; how old I do not know.  Possibly I am a hundred,possibly more; but I cannot tell because I have never aged as othermen, nor do I remember any childhood.  So far as I can recollect I havealways been a man, a man of about thirty.  I appear today as I didforty years and more ago, and yet I feel that I cannot go on livingforever; that some day I shall die the real death from which there isno resurrection.  I do not know why I should fear death, I who havedied twice and am still alive; but yet I have the same horror of it asyou who have never died, and it is because of this terror of death, Ibelieve, that I am so convinced of my mortality.
And because of this conviction I have determined to write down thestory of the interesting periods of my life and of my death.  I cannotexplain the phenomena; I can only set down here in the words of anordinary soldier of fortune a chronicle of the strange events thatbefell me during the ten years that my dead body lay undiscovered in anArizona cave.
I have never told this story, nor shall mortal man see this manuscriptuntil after I have passed over for eternity.  I know that the averagehuman mind will not believe what it cannot grasp, and so I do notpurpose being pilloried by the public, the pulpit, and the press, andheld up as a colossal liar when I am but telling the simple truthswhich some day science will substantiate.  Possibly the suggestionswhich I gained upon Mars, and the knowledge which I can set down inthis chronicle, will aid in an earlier understanding of the mysteriesof our sister planet; mysteries to you, but no longer mysteries to me.
My name is John Carter; I am better known as Captain Jack Carter ofVirginia.  At the close of the Civil War I found myself possessed ofseveral hundred thousand dollars (Confederate) and a captain'scommission in the cavalry arm of an army which no longer existed; theservant of a state which had vanished with the hopes of the South.Masterless, penniless, and with my only means of livelihood, fighting,gone, I determined to work my way to the southwest and attempt toretrieve my fallen fortunes in a search for gold.
I spent nearly a year prospecting in company with another Confederateofficer, Captain James K. Powell of Richmond.  We were extremelyfortunate, for late in the winter of 1865, after many hardships andprivations, we located the most remarkable gold-bearing quartz veinthat our wildest dreams had ever pictured.  Powell, who was a miningengineer by education, stated that we had uncovered over a milliondollars worth of ore in a trifle over three months.
As our equipment was crude in the extreme we decided that one of usmust return to civilization, purchase the necessary machinery andreturn with a sufficient force of men properly to work the mine.
As Powell was familiar with the country, as well as with the mechanicalrequirements of mining we determined that it would be best for him tomake the trip.  It was agreed that I was to hold down our claim againstthe remote possibility of its being jumped by some wandering prospector.
On March 3, 1866, Powell and I packed his provisions on two of ourburros, and bidding me good-bye he mounted his horse, and started downthe mountainside toward the valley, across which led the first stage ofhis journey.
The morning of Powell's departure was, like nearly all Arizonamornings, clear and beautiful; I could see him and his little packanimals picking their way down the mountainside toward the valley, andall during the morning I would catch occasional glimpses of them asthey topped a hog back or came out upon a level plateau.  My last sightof Powell was about three in the afternoon as he entered the shadows ofthe range on the opposite side of the valley.
Some half hour later I happened to glance casually across the valleyand was much surprised to note three little dots in about the sameplace I had last seen my friend and his two pack animals.  I am notgiven to needless worrying, but the more I tried to convince myselfthat all was well with Powell, and that the dots I had seen on histrail were antelope or wild horses, the less I was able to assuremyself.
Since we had entered the territory we had not seen a hostile Indian,and we had, therefore, become careless in the extreme, and were wont toridicule the stories we had heard of the great numbers of these viciousmarauders that were supposed to haunt the trails, taking their toll inlives and torture of every white party which fell into their mercilessclutches.
Powell, I knew, was well armed and, further, an experienced Indianfighter; but I too had lived and fought for years among the Sioux inthe North, and I knew that his chances were small against a party ofcunning trailing Apaches.  Finally I could endure the suspense nolonger, and, arming myself with my two Colt revolvers and a carbine, Istrapped two belts of cartridges about me and catching my saddle horse,started down the trail taken by Powell in the morning.
As soon as I reached comparatively level ground I urged my mount into acanter and continued this, where the going permitted, until, close upondusk, I discovered the point where other tracks joined those of Powell.They were the tracks of unshod ponies, three of them, and the ponieshad been galloping.
I followed rapidly until, darkness shutting down, I was forced to awaitthe rising of the moon, and given an opportunity to speculate on thequestion of the wisdom of my chase.  Possibly I had conjured upimpossible dangers, like some nervous old housewife, and when I shouldcatch up with Powell would get a good laugh for my pains.  However, Iam not prone to sensitiveness, and the following of a sense of duty,wherever it may lead, has always been a kind of fetich with methroughout my life; which may account for the honors bestowed upon meby three republics and the decorations and friendships of an old andpowerful emperor and several lesser kings, in whose service my swordhas been red many a time.
About nine o'clock the moon was sufficiently bright for me to proceedon my way and I had no difficulty in following the trail at a fastwalk, and in some places at a brisk trot until, about midnight, Ireached the water hole where Powell had expected to camp.  I came uponthe spot unexpectedly, finding it entirely deserted, with no signs ofhaving been recently occupied as a camp.
I was interested to note that the tracks of the pursuing horsemen, forsuch I was now convinced they must be, continued after Powell with onlya brief stop at the hole for water; and always at the same rate ofspeed as his.
I was positive now that the trailers were Apaches and that they wishedto capture Powell alive for the fiendish pleasure of the torture, so Iurged my horse onward at a most dangerous pace, hoping against hopethat I would catch up with the red rascals before they attacked him.
Further speculation was suddenly cut short by the faint report of twoshots far ahead of me.  I knew that Powell would need me now if ever,and I instantly urged my horse to his topmost speed up the narrow anddifficult mountain trail.
I had forged ahead for perhaps a mile or more without hearing furthersounds, when the trail suddenly debouched onto a small, open plateaunear the summit of the pass.  I had passed through a narrow,overhanging gorge just before entering suddenly upon this table land,and the sight which met my eyes filled me with consternation and dismay.
The little stretch of level land was white with Indian tepees, andthere were probably half a thousand red warriors clustered around someobject near the center of the camp.  Their attention was so whollyriveted to this point of interest that they did not notice me, and Ieasily could have turned back into the dark recesses of the gorge andmade my escape with perfect safety.  The fact, however, that thisthought did not occur to me until the following day removes anypossible right to a claim to heroism to which the narration of thisepisode might possibly otherwise entitle me.
I do not believe that I am made of the stuff which constitutes heroes,because, in all of the hundreds of instances that my voluntary actshave placed me face to face with death, I cannot recall a single onewhere any alternative step to that I took occurred to me until manyhours later.  My mind is evidently so constituted that I amsubconsciously forced into the path of duty without recourse totiresome mental processes.  However that may be, I have never regrettedthat cowardice is not optional with me.
In this instance I was, of course, positive that Powell was the centerof attraction, but whether I thought or acted first I do not know, butwithin an instant from the moment the scene broke upon my view I hadwhipped out my revolvers and was charging down upon the entire army ofwarriors, shooting rapidly, and whooping at the top of my lungs.Singlehanded, I could not have pursued better tactics, for the red men,convinced by sudden surprise that not less than a regiment of regularswas upon them, turned and fled in every direction for their bows,arrows, and rifles.
The view which their hurried routing disclosed filled me withapprehension and with rage.  Under the clear rays of the Arizona moonlay Powell, his body fairly bristling with the hostile arrows of thebraves.  That he was already dead I could not but be convinced, and yetI would have saved his body from mutilation at the hands of the Apachesas quickly as I would have saved the man himself from death.
Riding close to him I reached down from the saddle, and grasping hiscartridge belt drew him up across the withers of my mount.  A backwardglance convinced me that to return by the way I had come would be morehazardous than to continue across the plateau, so, putting spurs to mypoor beast, I made a dash for the opening to the pass which I coulddistinguish on the far side of the table land.
The Indians had by this time discovered that I was alone and I waspursued with imprecations, arrows, and rifle balls.  The fact that itis difficult to aim anything but imprecations accurately by moonlight,that they were upset by the sudden and unexpected manner of my advent,and that I was a rather rapidly moving target saved me from the variousdeadly projectiles of the enemy and permitted me to reach the shadowsof the surrounding peaks before an orderly pursuit could be organized.
My horse was traveling practically unguided as I knew that I hadprobably less knowledge of the exact location of the trail to the passthan he, and thus it happened that he entered a defile which led to thesummit of the range and not to the pass which I had hoped would carryme to the valley and to safety.  It is probable, however, that to thisfact I owe my life and the remarkable experiences and adventures whichbefell me during the following ten years.
My first knowledge that I was on the wrong trail came when I heard theyells of the pursuing savages suddenly grow fainter and fainter far offto my left.
I knew then that they had passed to the left of the jagged rockformation at the edge of the plateau, to the right of which my horsehad borne me and the body of Powell.
I drew rein on a little level promontory overlooking the trail belowand to my left, and saw the party of pursuing savages disappearingaround the point of a neighboring peak.
I knew the Indians would soon discover that they were on the wrongtrail and that the search for me would be renewed in the rightdirection as soon as they located my tracks.
I had gone but a short distance further when what seemed to be anexcellent trail opened up around the face of a high cliff.  The trailwas level and quite broad and led upward and in the general direction Iwished to go.  The cliff arose for several hundred feet on my right,and on my left was an equal and nearly perpendicular drop to the bottomof a rocky ravine.
I had followed this trail for perhaps a hundred yards when a sharp turnto the right brought me to the mouth of a large cave.  The opening wasabout four feet in height and three to four feet wide, and at thisopening the trail ended.
It was now morning, and, with the customary lack of dawn which is astartling characteristic of Arizona, it had become daylight almostwithout warning.
Dismounting, I laid Powell upon the ground, but the most painstakingexamination failed to reveal the faintest spark of life.  I forcedwater from my canteen between his dead lips, bathed his face and rubbedhis hands, working over him continuously for the better part of an hourin the face of the fact that I knew him to be dead.
I was very fond of Powell; he was thoroughly a man in every respect; apolished southern gentleman; a staunch and true friend; and it was witha feeling of the deepest grief that I finally gave up my crudeendeavors at resuscitation.
Leaving Powell's body where it lay on the ledge I crept into the caveto reconnoiter.  I found a large chamber, possibly a hundred feet indiameter and thirty or forty feet in height; a smooth and well-wornfloor, and many other evidences that the cave had, at some remoteperiod, been inhabited.  The back of the cave was so lost in denseshadow that I could not distinguish whether there were openings intoother apartments or not.
As I was continuing my examination I commenced to feel a pleasantdrowsiness creeping over me which I attributed to the fatigue of mylong and strenuous ride, and the reaction from the excitement of thefight and the pursuit.  I felt comparatively safe in my presentlocation as I knew that one man could defend the trail to the caveagainst an army.
I soon became so drowsy that I could scarcely resist the strong desireto throw myself on the floor of the cave for a few moments' rest, but Iknew that this would never do, as it would mean certain death at thehands of my red friends, who might be upon me at any moment.  With aneffort I started toward the opening of the cave only to reel drunkenlyagainst a side wall, and from there slip prone upon the floor.



CHAPTER II
THE ESCAPE OF THE DEAD

A sense of delicious dreaminess overcame me, my muscles relaxed, and Iwas on the point of giving way to my desire to sleep when the sound ofapproaching horses reached my ears.  I attempted to spring to my feetbut was horrified to discover that my muscles refused to respond to mywill.  I was now thoroughly awake, but as unable to move a muscle asthough turned to stone.  It was then, for the first time, that Inoticed a slight vapor filling the cave.  It was extremely tenuous andonly noticeable against the opening which led to daylight.  There alsocame to my nostrils a faintly pungent odor, and I could only assumethat I had been overcome by some poisonous gas, but why I should retainmy mental faculties and yet be unable to move I could not fathom.
I lay facing the opening of the cave and where I could see the shortstretch of trail which lay between the cave and the turn of the cliffaround which the trail led.  The noise of the approaching horses hadceased, and I judged the Indians were creeping stealthily upon me alongthe little ledge which led to my living tomb.  I remember that I hopedthey would make short work of me as I did not particularly relish thethought of the innumerable things they might do to me if the spiritprompted them.
I had not long to wait before a stealthy sound apprised me of theirnearness, and then a war-bonneted, paint-streaked face was thrustcautiously around the shoulder of the cliff, and savage eyes lookedinto mine.  That he could see me in the dim light of the cave I wassure for the early morning sun was falling full upon me through theopening.
The fellow, instead of approaching, merely stood and stared; his eyesbulging and his jaw dropped.  And then another savage face appeared,and a third and fourth and fifth, craning their necks over theshoulders of their fellows whom they could not pass upon the narrowledge.  Each face was the picture of awe and fear, but for what reasonI did not know, nor did I learn until ten years later.  That there werestill other braves behind those who regarded me was apparent from thefact that the leaders passed back whispered word to those behind them.
Suddenly a low but distinct moaning sound issued from the recesses ofthe cave behind me, and, as it reached the ears of the Indians, theyturned and fled in terror, panic-stricken.  So frantic were theirefforts to escape from the unseen thing behind me that one of thebraves was hurled headlong from the cliff to the rocks below.  Theirwild cries echoed in the canyon for a short time, and then all wasstill once more.
The sound which had frightened them was not repeated, but it had beensufficient as it was to start me speculating on the possible horrorwhich lurked in the shadows at my back.  Fear is a relative term and soI can only measure my feelings at that time by what I had experiencedin previous positions of danger and by those that I have passed throughsince; but I can say without shame that if the sensations I enduredduring the next few minutes were fear, then may God help the coward,for cowardice is of a surety its own punishment.
To be held paralyzed, with one's back toward some horrible and unknowndanger from the very sound of which the ferocious Apache warriors turnin wild stampede, as a flock of sheep would madly flee from a pack ofwolves, seems to me the last word in fearsome predicaments for a manwho had ever been used to fighting for his life with all the energy ofa powerful physique.
Several times I thought I heard faint sounds behind me as of somebodymoving cautiously, but eventually even these ceased, and I was left tothe contemplation of my position without interruption.  I could butvaguely conjecture the cause of my paralysis, and my only hope lay inthat it might pass off as suddenly as it had fallen upon me.
Late in the afternoon my horse, which had been standing with draggingrein before the cave, started slowly down the trail, evidently insearch of food and water, and I was left alone with my mysteriousunknown companion and the dead body of my friend, which lay just withinmy range of vision upon the ledge where I had placed it in the earlymorning.
From then until possibly midnight all was silence, the silence of thedead; then, suddenly, the awful moan of the morning broke upon mystartled ears, and there came again from the black shadows the sound ofa moving thing, and a faint rustling as of dead leaves.  The shock tomy already overstrained nervous system was terrible in the extreme, andwith a superhuman effort I strove to break my awful bonds.  It was aneffort of the mind, of the will, of the nerves; not muscular, for Icould not move even so much as my little finger, but none the lessmighty for all that.  And then something gave, there was a momentaryfeeling of nausea, a sharp click as of the snapping of a steel wire,and I stood with my back against the wall of the cave facing my unknownfoe.
And then the moonlight flooded the cave, and there before me lay my ownbody as it had been lying all these hours, with the eyes staring towardthe open ledge and the hands resting limply upon the ground.  I lookedfirst at my lifeless clay there upon the floor of the cave and thendown at myself in utter bewilderment; for there I lay clothed, and yethere I stood but naked as at the minute of my birth.
The transition had been so sudden and so unexpected that it left me fora moment forgetful of aught else than my strange metamorphosis.  Myfirst thought was, is this then death!  Have I indeed passed overforever into that other life!  But I could not well believe this, as Icould feel my heart pounding against my ribs from the exertion of myefforts to release myself from the anaesthesis which had held me.  Mybreath was coming in quick, short gasps, cold sweat stood out fromevery pore of my body, and the ancient experiment of pinching revealedthe fact that I was anything other than a wraith.
Again was I suddenly recalled to my immediate surroundings by arepetition of the weird moan from the depths of the cave.  Naked andunarmed as I was, I had no desire to face the unseen thing whichmenaced me.
My revolvers were strapped to my lifeless body which, for someunfathomable reason, I could not bring myself to touch.  My carbine wasin its boot, strapped to my saddle, and as my horse had wandered off Iwas left without means of defense.  My only alternative seemed to liein flight and my decision was crystallized by a recurrence of therustling sound from the thing which now seemed, in the darkness of thecave and to my distorted imagination, to be creeping stealthily upon me.
Unable longer to resist the temptation to escape this horrible place Ileaped quickly through the opening into the starlight of a clearArizona night.  The crisp, fresh mountain air outside the cave acted asan immediate tonic and I felt new life and new courage coursing throughme.  Pausing upon the brink of the ledge I upbraided myself for whatnow seemed to me wholly unwarranted apprehension.  I reasoned withmyself that I had lain helpless for many hours within the cave, yetnothing had molested me, and my better judgment, when permitted thedirection of clear and logical reasoning, convinced me that the noisesI had heard must have resulted from purely natural and harmless causes;probably the conformation of the cave was such that a slight breeze hadcaused the sounds I heard.
I decided to investigate, but first I lifted my head to fill my lungswith the pure, invigorating night air of the mountains.  As I did so Isaw stretching far below me the beautiful vista of rocky gorge, andlevel, cacti-studded flat, wrought by the moonlight into a miracle ofsoft splendor and wondrous enchantment.
Few western wonders are more inspiring than the beauties of an Arizonamoonlit landscape; the silvered mountains in the distance, the strangelights and shadows upon hog back and arroyo, and the grotesque detailsof the stiff, yet beautiful cacti form a picture at once enchanting andinspiring; as though one were catching for the first time a glimpse ofsome dead and forgotten world, so different is it from the aspect ofany other spot upon our earth.
As I stood thus meditating, I turned my gaze from the landscape to theheavens where the myriad stars formed a gorgeous and fitting canopy forthe wonders of the earthly scene.  My attention was quickly riveted bya large red star close to the distant horizon.  As I gazed upon it Ifelt a spell of overpowering fascination--it was Mars, the god of war,and for me, the fighting man, it had always held the power ofirresistible enchantment.  As I gazed at it on that far-gone night itseemed to call across the unthinkable void, to lure me to it, to drawme as the lodestone attracts a particle of iron.
My longing was beyond the power of opposition; I closed my eyes,stretched out my arms toward the god of my vocation and felt myselfdrawn with the suddenness of thought through the trackless immensity ofspace.  There was an instant of extreme cold and utter darkness.



CHAPTER III
MY ADVENT ON MARS

I opened my eyes upon a strange and weird landscape.  I knew that I wason Mars; not once did I question either my sanity or my wakefulness.  Iwas not asleep, no need for pinching here; my inner consciousness toldme as plainly that I was upon Mars as your conscious mind tells youthat you are upon Earth.  You do not question the fact; neither did I.
I found myself lying prone upon a bed of yellowish, mosslike vegetationwhich stretched around me in all directions for interminable miles.  Iseemed to be lying in a deep, circular basin, along the outer verge ofwhich I could distinguish the irregularities of low hills.
It was midday, the sun was shining full upon me and the heat of it wasrather intense upon my naked body, yet no greater than would have beentrue under similar conditions on an Arizona desert.  Here and therewere slight outcroppings of quartz-bearing rock which glistened in thesunlight; and a little to my left, perhaps a hundred yards, appeared alow, walled enclosure about four feet in height.  No water, and noother vegetation than the moss was in evidence, and as I was somewhatthirsty I determined to do a little exploring.
Springing to my feet I received my first Martian surprise, for theeffort, which on Earth would have brought me standing upright, carriedme into the Martian air to the height of about three yards.  I alightedsoftly upon the ground, however, without appreciable shock or jar.  Nowcommenced a series of evolutions which even then seemed ludicrous inthe extreme.  I found that I must learn to walk all over again, as themuscular exertion which carried me easily and safely upon Earth playedstrange antics with me upon Mars.
Instead of progressing in a sane and dignified manner, my attempts towalk resulted in a variety of hops which took me clear of the ground acouple of feet at each step and landed me sprawling upon my face orback at the end of each second or third hop.  My muscles, perfectlyattuned and accustomed to the force of gravity on Earth, played themischief with me in attempting for the first time to cope with thelesser gravitation and lower air pressure on Mars.
I was determined, however, to explore the low structure which was theonly evidence of habitation in sight, and so I hit upon the unique planof reverting to first principles in locomotion, creeping.  I did fairlywell at this and in a few moments had reached the low, encircling wallof the enclosure.
There appeared to be no doors or windows upon the side nearest me, butas the wall was but about four feet high I cautiously gained my feetand peered over the top upon the strangest sight it had ever been givenme to see.
The roof of the enclosure was of solid glass about four or five inchesin thickness, and beneath this were several hundred large eggs,perfectly round and snowy white.  The eggs were nearly uniform in sizebeing about two and one-half feet in diameter.
Five or six had already hatched and the grotesque caricatures which satblinking in the sunlight were enough to cause me to doubt my sanity.They seemed mostly head, with little scrawny bodies, long necks and sixlegs, or, as I afterward learned, two legs and two arms, with anintermediary pair of limbs which could be used at will either as armsor legs.  Their eyes were set at the extreme sides of their heads atrifle above the center and protruded in such a manner that they couldbe directed either forward or back and also independently of eachother, thus permitting this queer animal to look in any direction, orin two directions at once, without the necessity of turning the head.
The ears, which were slightly above the eyes and closer together, weresmall, cup-shaped antennae, protruding not more than an inch on theseyoung specimens.  Their noses were but longitudinal slits in the centerof their faces, midway between their mouths and ears.
There was no hair on their bodies, which were of a very lightyellowish-green color.  In the adults, as I was to learn quite soon,this color deepens to an olive green and is darker in the male than inthe female.  Further, the heads of the adults are not so out ofproportion to their bodies as in the case of the young.
The iris of the eyes is blood red, as in Albinos, while the pupil isdark.  The eyeball itself is very white, as are the teeth.  Theselatter add a most ferocious appearance to an otherwise fearsome andterrible countenance, as the lower tusks curve upward to sharp pointswhich end about where the eyes of earthly human beings are located.The whiteness of the teeth is not that of ivory, but of the snowiestand most gleaming of china.  Against the dark background of their oliveskins their tusks stand out in a most striking manner, making theseweapons present a singularly formidable appearance.
Most of these details I noted later, for I was given but little time tospeculate on the wonders of my new discovery.  I had seen that the eggswere in the process of hatching, and as I stood watching the hideouslittle monsters break from their shells I failed to note the approachof a score of full-grown Martians from behind me.
Coming, as they did, over the soft and soundless moss, which coverspractically the entire surface of Mars with the exception of the frozenareas at the poles and the scattered cultivated districts, they mighthave captured me easily, but their intentions were far more sinister.It was the rattling of the accouterments of the foremost warrior whichwarned me.
On such a little thing my life hung that I often marvel that I escapedso easily.  Had not the rifle of the leader of the party swung from itsfastenings beside his saddle in such a way as to strike against thebutt of his great metal-shod spear I should have snuffed out withoutever knowing that death was near me.  But the little sound caused me toturn, and there upon me, not ten feet from my breast, was the point ofthat huge spear, a spear forty feet long, tipped with gleaming metal,and held low at the side of a mounted replica of the little devils Ihad been watching.
But how puny and harmless they now looked beside this huge and terrificincarnation of hate, of vengeance and of death.  The man himself, forsuch I may call him, was fully fifteen feet in height and, on Earth,would have weighed some four hundred pounds.  He sat his mount as wesit a horse, grasping the animal's barrel with his lower limbs, whilethe hands of his two right arms held his immense spear low at the sideof his mount; his two left arms were outstretched laterally to helppreserve his balance, the thing he rode having neither bridle or reinsof any description for guidance.
And his mount!  How can earthly words describe it!  It towered ten feetat the shoulder; had four legs on either side; a broad flat tail,larger at the tip than at the root, and which it held straight outbehind while running; a gaping mouth which split its head from itssnout to its long, massive neck.
Like its master, it was entirely devoid of hair, but was of a darkslate color and exceeding smooth and glossy.  Its belly was white, andits legs shaded from the slate of its shoulders and hips to a vividyellow at the feet.  The feet themselves were heavily padded andnailless, which fact had also contributed to the noiselessness of theirapproach, and, in common with a multiplicity of legs, is acharacteristic feature of the fauna of Mars.  The highest type of manand one other animal, the only mammal existing on Mars, alone havewell-formed nails, and there are absolutely no hoofed animals inexistence there.
Behind this first charging demon trailed nineteen others, similar inall respects, but, as I learned later, bearing individualcharacteristics peculiar to themselves; precisely as no two of us areidentical although we are all cast in a similar mold.  This picture, orrather materialized nightmare, which I have described at length, madebut one terrible and swift impression on me as I turned to meet it.
Unarmed and naked as I was, the first law of nature manifested itselfin the only possible solution of my immediate problem, and that was toget out of the vicinity of the point of the charging spear.Consequently I gave a very earthly and at the same time superhuman leapto reach the top of the Martian incubator, for such I had determined itmust be.
My effort was crowned with a success which appalled me no less than itseemed to surprise the Martian warriors, for it carried me fully thirtyfeet into the air and landed me a hundred feet from my pursuers and onthe opposite side of the enclosure.
I alighted upon the soft moss easily and without mishap, and turningsaw my enemies lined up along the further wall.  Some were surveying mewith expressions which I afterward discovered marked extremeastonishment, and the others were evidently satisfying themselves thatI had not molested their young.
They were conversing together in low tones, and gesticulating andpointing toward me.  Their discovery that I had not harmed the littleMartians, and that I was unarmed, must have caused them to look upon mewith less ferocity; but, as I was to learn later, the thing whichweighed most in my favor was my exhibition of hurdling.
While the Martians are immense, their bones are very large and they aremuscled only in proportion to the gravitation which they must overcome.The result is that they are infinitely less agile and less powerful, inproportion to their weight, than an Earth man, and I doubt that wereone of them suddenly to be transported to Earth he could lift his ownweight from the ground; in fact, I am convinced that he could not do so.
My feat then was as marvelous upon Mars as it would have been uponEarth, and from desiring to annihilate me they suddenly looked upon meas a wonderful discovery to be captured and exhibited among theirfellows.
The respite my unexpected agility had given me permitted me toformulate plans for the immediate future and to note more closely theappearance of the warriors, for I could not disassociate these peoplein my mind from those other warriors who, only the day before, had beenpursuing me.
I noted that each was armed with several other weapons in addition tothe huge spear which I have described.  The weapon which caused me todecide against an attempt at escape by flight was what was evidently arifle of some description, and which I felt, for some reason, they werepeculiarly efficient in handling.
These rifles were of a white metal stocked with wood, which I learnedlater was a very light and intensely hard growth much prized on Mars,and entirely unknown to us denizens of Earth.  The metal of the barrelis an alloy composed principally of aluminum and steel which they havelearned to temper to a hardness far exceeding that of the steel withwhich we are familiar.  The weight of these rifles is comparativelylittle, and with the small caliber, explosive, radium projectiles whichthey use, and the great length of the barrel, they are deadly in theextreme and at ranges which would be unthinkable on Earth.  Thetheoretic effective radius of this rifle is three hundred miles, butthe best they can do in actual service when equipped with theirwireless finders and sighters is but a trifle over two hundred miles.
This is quite far enough to imbue me with great respect for the Martianfirearm, and some telepathic force must have warned me against anattempt to escape in broad daylight from under the muzzles of twenty ofthese death-dealing machines.
The Martians, after conversing for a short time, turned and rode awayin the direction from which they had come, leaving one of their numberalone by the enclosure.  When they had covered perhaps two hundredyards they halted, and turning their mounts toward us sat watching thewarrior by the enclosure.
He was the one whose spear had so nearly transfixed me, and wasevidently the leader of the band, as I had noted that they seemed tohave moved to their present position at his direction.  When his forcehad come to a halt he dismounted, threw down his spear and small arms,and came around the end of the incubator toward me, entirely unarmedand as naked as I, except for the ornaments strapped upon his head,limbs, and breast.
When he was within about fifty feet of me he unclasped an enormousmetal armlet, and holding it toward me in the open palm of his hand,addressed me in a clear, resonant voice, but in a language, it isneedless to say, I could not understand.  He then stopped as thoughwaiting for my reply, pricking up his antennae-like ears and cockinghis strange-looking eyes still further toward me.
As the silence became painful I concluded to hazard a littleconversation on my own part, as I had guessed that he was makingovertures of peace.  The throwing down of his weapons and thewithdrawing of his troop before his advance toward me would havesignified a peaceful mission anywhere on Earth, so why not, then, onMars!
Placing my hand over my heart I bowed low to the Martian and explainedto him that while I did not understand his language, his actions spokefor the peace and friendship that at the present moment were most dearto my heart.  Of course I might have been a babbling brook for all theintelligence my speech carried to him, but he understood the actionwith which I immediately followed my words.
Stretching my hand toward him, I advanced and took the armlet from hisopen palm, clasping it about my arm above the elbow; smiled at him andstood waiting.  His wide mouth spread into an answering smile, andlocking one of his intermediary arms in mine we turned and walked backtoward his mount.  At the same time he motioned his followers toadvance.  They started toward us on a wild run, but were checked by asignal from him.  Evidently he feared that were I to be reallyfrightened again I might jump entirely out of the landscape.
He exchanged a few words with his men, motioned to me that I would ridebehind one of them, and then mounted his own animal.  The fellowdesignated reached down two or three hands and lifted me up behind himon the glossy back of his mount, where I hung on as best I could by thebelts and straps which held the Martian's weapons and ornaments.
The entire cavalcade then turned and galloped away toward the range ofhills in the distance.



CHAPTER IV
A PRISONER

We had gone perhaps ten miles when the ground began to rise veryrapidly.  We were, as I was later to learn, nearing the edge of one ofMars' long-dead seas, in the bottom of which my encounter with theMartians had taken place.
In a short time we gained the foot of the mountains, and aftertraversing a narrow gorge came to an open valley, at the far extremityof which was a low table land upon which I beheld an enormous city.Toward this we galloped, entering it by what appeared to be a ruinedroadway leading out from the city, but only to the edge of the tableland, where it ended abruptly in a flight of broad steps.
Upon closer observation I saw as we passed them that the buildings weredeserted, and while not greatly decayed had the appearance of nothaving been tenanted for years, possibly for ages.  Toward the centerof the city was a large plaza, and upon this and in the buildingsimmediately surrounding it were camped some nine or ten hundredcreatures of the same breed as my captors, for such I now consideredthem despite the suave manner in which I had been trapped.
With the exception of their ornaments all were naked.  The women variedin appearance but little from the men, except that their tusks weremuch larger in proportion to their height, in some instances curvingnearly to their high-set ears.  Their bodies were smaller and lighterin color, and their fingers and toes bore the rudiments of nails, whichwere entirely lacking among the males.  The adult females ranged inheight from ten to twelve feet.
The children were light in color, even lighter than the women, and alllooked precisely alike to me, except that some were taller than others;older, I presumed.
I saw no signs of extreme age among them, nor is there any appreciabledifference in their appearance from the age of maturity, about forty,until, at about the age of one thousand years, they go voluntarily upontheir last strange pilgrimage down the river Iss, which leads no livingMartian knows whither and from whose bosom no Martian has everreturned, or would be allowed to live did he return after onceembarking upon its cold, dark waters.
Only about one Martian in a thousand dies of sickness or disease, andpossibly about twenty take the voluntary pilgrimage.  The other ninehundred and seventy-nine die violent deaths in duels, in hunting, inaviation and in war; but perhaps by far the greatest death loss comesduring the age of childhood, when vast numbers of the little Martiansfall victims to the great white apes of Mars.
The average life expectancy of a Martian after the age of maturity isabout three hundred years, but would be nearer the one-thousand markwere it not for the various means leading to violent death.  Owing tothe waning resources of the planet it evidently became necessary tocounteract the increasing longevity which their remarkable skill intherapeutics and surgery produced, and so human life has come to beconsidered but lightly on Mars, as is evidenced by their dangeroussports and the almost continual warfare between the various communities.
There are other and natural causes tending toward a diminution ofpopulation, but nothing contributes so greatly to this end as the factthat no male or female Martian is ever voluntarily without a weapon ofdestruction.
As we neared the plaza and my presence was discovered we wereimmediately surrounded by hundreds of the creatures who seemed anxiousto pluck me from my seat behind my guard.  A word from the leader ofthe party stilled their clamor, and we proceeded at a trot across theplaza to the entrance of as magnificent an edifice as mortal eye hasrested upon.
The building was low, but covered an enormous area.  It was constructedof gleaming white marble inlaid with gold and brilliant stones whichsparkled and scintillated in the sunlight.  The main entrance was somehundred feet in width and projected from the building proper to form ahuge canopy above the entrance hall.  There was no stairway, but agentle incline to the first floor of the building opened into anenormous chamber encircled by galleries.
On the floor of this chamber, which was dotted with highly carvedwooden desks and chairs, were assembled about forty or fifty maleMartians around the steps of a rostrum.  On the platform propersquatted an enormous warrior heavily loaded with metal ornaments,gay-colored feathers and beautifully wrought leather trappingsingeniously set with precious stones.  From his shoulders depended ashort cape of white fur lined with brilliant scarlet silk.
What struck me as most remarkable about this assemblage and the hall inwhich they were congregated was the fact that the creatures wereentirely out of proportion to the desks, chairs, and other furnishings;these being of a size adapted to human beings such as I, whereas thegreat bulks of the Martians could scarcely have squeezed into thechairs, nor was there room beneath the desks for their long legs.Evidently, then, there were other denizens on Mars than the wild andgrotesque creatures into whose hands I had fallen, but the evidences ofextreme antiquity which showed all around me indicated that thesebuildings might have belonged to some long-extinct and forgotten racein the dim antiquity of Mars.
Our party had halted at the entrance to the building, and at a signfrom the leader I had been lowered to the ground.  Again locking hisarm in mine, we had proceeded into the audience chamber.  There werefew formalities observed in approaching the Martian chieftain.  Mycaptor merely strode up to the rostrum, the others making way for himas he advanced.  The chieftain rose to his feet and uttered the name ofmy escort who, in turn, halted and repeated the name of the rulerfollowed by his title.
At the time, this ceremony and the words they uttered meant nothing tome, but later I came to know that this was the customary greetingbetween green Martians.  Had the men been strangers, and thereforeunable to exchange names, they would have silently exchanged ornaments,had their missions been peaceful--otherwise they would have exchangedshots, or have fought out their introduction with some other of theirvarious weapons.
My captor, whose name was Tars Tarkas, was virtually the vice-chieftainof the community, and a man of great ability as a statesman andwarrior.  He evidently explained briefly the incidents connected withhis expedition, including my capture, and when he had concluded thechieftain addressed me at some length.
I replied in our good old English tongue merely to convince him thatneither of us could understand the other; but I noticed that when Ismiled slightly on concluding, he did likewise.  This fact, and thesimilar occurrence during my first talk with Tars Tarkas, convinced methat we had at least something in common; the ability to smile,therefore to laugh; denoting a sense of humor.  But I was to learn thatthe Martian smile is merely perfunctory, and that the Martian laugh isa thing to cause strong men to blanch in horror.
The ideas of humor among the green men of Mars are widely at variancewith our conceptions of incitants to merriment.  The death agonies of afellow being are, to these strange creatures provocative of the wildesthilarity, while their chief form of commonest amusement is to inflictdeath on their prisoners of war in various ingenious and horrible ways.
The assembled warriors and chieftains examined me closely, feeling mymuscles and the texture of my skin.  The principal chieftain thenevidently signified a desire to see me perform, and, motioning me tofollow, he started with Tars Tarkas for the open plaza.
Now, I had made no attempt to walk, since my first signal failure,except while tightly grasping Tars Tarkas' arm, and so now I wentskipping and flitting about among the desks and chairs like somemonstrous grasshopper.  After bruising myself severely, much to theamusement of the Martians, I again had recourse to creeping, but thisdid not suit them and I was roughly jerked to my feet by a toweringfellow who had laughed most heartily at my misfortunes.
As he banged me down upon my feet his face was bent close to mine and Idid the only thing a gentleman might do under the circumstances ofbrutality, boorishness, and lack of consideration for a stranger'srights; I swung my fist squarely to his jaw and he went down like afelled ox.  As he sunk to the floor I wheeled around with my backtoward the nearest desk, expecting to be overwhelmed by the vengeanceof his fellows, but determined to give them as good a battle as theunequal odds would permit before I gave up my life.
My fears were groundless, however, as the other Martians, at firststruck dumb with wonderment, finally broke into wild peals of laughterand applause.  I did not recognize the applause as such, but later,when I had become acquainted with their customs, I learned that I hadwon what they seldom accord, a manifestation of approbation.
The fellow whom I had struck lay where he had fallen, nor did any ofhis mates approach him.  Tars Tarkas advanced toward me, holding outone of his arms, and we thus proceeded to the plaza without furthermishap.  I did not, of course, know the reason for which we had come tothe open, but I was not long in being enlightened.  They first repeatedthe word "sak" a number of times, and then Tars Tarkas made severaljumps, repeating the same word before each leap; then, turning to me,he said, "sak!"  I saw what they were after, and gathering myselftogether I "sakked" with such marvelous success that I cleared a goodhundred and fifty feet; nor did I this time, lose my equilibrium, butlanded squarely upon my feet without falling.  I then returned by easyjumps of twenty-five or thirty feet to the little group of warriors.
My exhibition had been witnessed by several hundred lesser Martians,and they immediately broke into demands for a repetition, which thechieftain then ordered me to make; but I was both hungry and thirsty,and determined on the spot that my only method of salvation was todemand the consideration from these creatures which they evidentlywould not voluntarily accord.  I therefore ignored the repeatedcommands to "sak," and each time they were made I motioned to my mouthand rubbed my stomach.
Tars Tarkas and the chief exchanged a few words, and the former,calling to a young female among the throng, gave her some instructionsand motioned me to accompany her.  I grasped her proffered arm andtogether we crossed the plaza toward a large building on the far side.
My fair companion was about eight feet tall, having just arrived atmaturity, but not yet to her full height.  She was of a lightolive-green color, with a smooth, glossy hide.  Her name, as Iafterward learned, was Sola, and she belonged to the retinue of TarsTarkas.  She conducted me to a spacious chamber in one of the buildingsfronting on the plaza, and which, from the litter of silks and fursupon the floor, I took to be the sleeping quarters of several of thenatives.
The room was well lighted by a number of large windows and wasbeautifully decorated with mural paintings and mosaics, but upon allthere seemed to rest that indefinable touch of the finger of antiquitywhich convinced me that the architects and builders of these wondrouscreations had nothing in common with the crude half-brutes which nowoccupied them.
Sola motioned me to be seated upon a pile of silks near the center ofthe room, and, turning, made a peculiar hissing sound, as thoughsignaling to someone in an adjoining room.  In response to her call Iobtained my first sight of a new Martian wonder.  It waddled in on itsten short legs, and squatted down before the girl like an obedientpuppy.  The thing was about the size of a Shetland pony, but its headbore a slight resemblance to that of a frog, except that the jaws wereequipped with three rows of long, sharp tusks.



CHAPTER V
I ELUDE MY WATCH DOG

Sola stared into the brute's wicked-looking eyes, muttered a word ortwo of command, pointed to me, and left the chamber.  I could not butwonder what this ferocious-looking monstrosity might do when left alonein such close proximity to such a relatively tender morsel of meat; butmy fears were groundless, as the beast, after surveying me intently fora moment, crossed the room to the only exit which led to the street,and lay down full length across the threshold.
This was my first experience with a Martian watch dog, but it wasdestined not to be my last, for this fellow guarded me carefully duringthe time I remained a captive among these green men; twice saving mylife, and never voluntarily being away from me a moment.
While Sola was away I took occasion to examine more minutely the roomin which I found myself captive.  The mural painting depicted scenes ofrare and wonderful beauty; mountains, rivers, lake, ocean, meadow,trees and flowers, winding roadways, sun-kissed gardens--scenes whichmight have portrayed earthly views but for the different colorings ofthe vegetation.  The work had evidently been wrought by a master hand,so subtle the atmosphere, so perfect the technique; yet nowhere wasthere a representation of a living animal, either human or brute, bywhich I could guess at the likeness of these other and perhaps extinctdenizens of Mars.
While I was allowing my fancy to run riot in wild conjecture on thepossible explanation of the strange anomalies which I had so far metwith on Mars, Sola returned bearing both food and drink.  These sheplaced on the floor beside me, and seating herself a short ways offregarded me intently.  The food consisted of about a pound of somesolid substance of the consistency of cheese and almost tasteless,while the liquid was apparently milk from some animal.  It was notunpleasant to the taste, though slightly acid, and I learned in a shorttime to prize it very highly.  It came, as I later discovered, not froman animal, as there is only one mammal on Mars and that one very rareindeed, but from a large plant which grows practically without water,but seems to distill its plentiful supply of milk from the products ofthe soil, the moisture of the air, and the rays of the sun.  A singleplant of this species will give eight or ten quarts of milk per day.
After I had eaten I was greatly invigorated, but feeling the need ofrest I stretched out upon the silks and was soon asleep.  I must haveslept several hours, as it was dark when I awoke, and I was very cold.I noticed that someone had thrown a fur over me, but it had becomepartially dislodged and in the darkness I could not see to replace it.Suddenly a hand reached out and pulled the fur over me, shortlyafterwards adding another to my covering.
I presumed that my watchful guardian was Sola, nor was I wrong.  Thisgirl alone, among all the green Martians with whom I came in contact,disclosed characteristics of sympathy, kindliness, and affection; herministrations to my bodily wants were unfailing, and her solicitouscare saved me from much suffering and many hardships.
As I was to learn, the Martian nights are extremely cold, and as thereis practically no twilight or dawn, the changes in temperature aresudden and most uncomfortable, as are the transitions from brilliantdaylight to darkness.  The nights are either brilliantly illumined orvery dark, for if neither of the two moons of Mars happen to be in thesky almost total darkness results, since the lack of atmosphere, or,rather, the very thin atmosphere, fails to diffuse the starlight to anygreat extent; on the other hand, if both of the moons are in theheavens at night the surface of the ground is brightly illuminated.
Both of Mars' moons are vastly nearer her than is our moon to Earth;the nearer moon being but about five thousand miles distant, while thefurther is but little more than fourteen thousand miles away, againstthe nearly one-quarter million miles which separate us from our moon.The nearer moon of Mars makes a complete revolution around the planetin a little over seven and one-half hours, so that she may be seenhurtling through the sky like some huge meteor two or three times eachnight, revealing all her phases during each transit of the heavens.
The further moon revolves about Mars in something over thirty andone-quarter hours, and with her sister satellite makes a nocturnalMartian scene one of splendid and weird grandeur.  And it is well thatnature has so graciously and abundantly lighted the Martian night, forthe green men of Mars, being a nomadic race without high intellectualdevelopment, have but crude means for artificial lighting; dependingprincipally upon torches, a kind of candle, and a peculiar oil lampwhich generates a gas and burns without a wick.
This last device produces an intensely brilliant far-reaching whitelight, but as the natural oil which it requires can only be obtained bymining in one of several widely separated and remote localities it isseldom used by these creatures whose only thought is for today, andwhose hatred for manual labor has kept them in a semi-barbaric statefor countless ages.
After Sola had replenished my coverings I again slept, nor did I awakenuntil daylight.  The other occupants of the room, five in number, wereall females, and they were still sleeping, piled high with a motleyarray of silks and furs.  Across the threshold lay stretched thesleepless guardian brute, just as I had last seen him on the precedingday; apparently he had not moved a muscle; his eyes were fairly gluedupon me, and I fell to wondering just what might befall me should Iendeavor to escape.
I have ever been prone to seek adventure and to investigate andexperiment where wiser men would have left well enough alone.  Ittherefore now occurred to me that the surest way of learning the exactattitude of this beast toward me would be to attempt to leave the room.I felt fairly secure in my belief that I could escape him should hepursue me once I was outside the building, for I had begun to takegreat pride in my ability as a jumper.  Furthermore, I could see fromthe shortness of his legs that the brute himself was no jumper andprobably no runner.
Slowly and carefully, therefore, I gained my feet, only to see that mywatcher did the same; cautiously I advanced toward him, finding that bymoving with a shuffling gait I could retain my balance as well as makereasonably rapid progress.  As I neared the brute he backed cautiouslyaway from me, and when I had reached the open he moved to one side tolet me pass.  He then fell in behind me and followed about ten paces inmy rear as I made my way along the deserted street.
Evidently his mission was to protect me only, I thought, but when wereached the edge of the city he suddenly sprang before me, utteringstrange sounds and baring his ugly and ferocious tusks.  Thinking tohave some amusement at his expense, I rushed toward him, and whenalmost upon him sprang into the air, alighting far beyond him and awayfrom the city.  He wheeled instantly and charged me with the mostappalling speed I had ever beheld.  I had thought his short legs a barto swiftness, but had he been coursing with greyhounds the latter wouldhave appeared as though asleep on a door mat.  As I was to learn, thisis the fleetest animal on Mars, and owing to its intelligence, loyalty,and ferocity is used in hunting, in war, and as the protector of theMartian man.
I quickly saw that I would have difficulty in escaping the fangs of thebeast on a straightaway course, and so I met his charge by doubling inmy tracks and leaping over him as he was almost upon me.  This maneuvergave me a considerable advantage, and I was able to reach the cityquite a bit ahead of him, and as he came tearing after me I jumped fora window about thirty feet from the ground in the face of one of thebuildings overlooking the valley.
Grasping the sill I pulled myself up to a sitting posture withoutlooking into the building, and gazed down at the baffled animal beneathme.  My exultation was short-lived, however, for scarcely had I gaineda secure seat upon the sill than a huge hand grasped me by the neckfrom behind and dragged me violently into the room.  Here I was thrownupon my back, and beheld standing over me a colossal ape-like creature,white and hairless except for an enormous shock of bristly hair uponits head.



CHAPTER VI
A FIGHT THAT WON FRIENDS

The thing, which more nearly resembled our earthly men than it did theMartians I had seen, held me pinioned to the ground with one huge foot,while it jabbered and gesticulated at some answering creature behindme.  This other, which was evidently its mate, soon came toward us,bearing a mighty stone cudgel with which it evidently intended to brainme.
The creatures were about ten or fifteen feet tall, standing erect, andhad, like the green Martians, an intermediary set of arms or legs,midway between their upper and lower limbs.  Their eyes were closetogether and non-protruding; their ears were high set, but morelaterally located than those of the Martians, while their snouts andteeth were strikingly like those of our African gorilla.  Altogetherthey were not unlovely when viewed in comparison with the greenMartians.
The cudgel was swinging in the arc which ended upon my upturned facewhen a bolt of myriad-legged horror hurled itself through the doorwayfull upon the breast of my executioner.  With a shriek of fear the apewhich held me leaped through the open window, but its mate closed in aterrific death struggle with my preserver, which was nothing less thanmy faithful watch-thing; I cannot bring myself to call so hideous acreature a dog.
As quickly as possible I gained my feet and backing against the wall Iwitnessed such a battle as it is vouchsafed few beings to see.  Thestrength, agility, and blind ferocity of these two creatures isapproached by nothing known to earthly man.  My beast had an advantagein his first hold, having sunk his mighty fangs far into the breast ofhis adversary; but the great arms and paws of the ape, backed bymuscles far transcending those of the Martian men I had seen, hadlocked the throat of my guardian and slowly were choking out his life,and bending back his head and neck upon his body, where I momentarilyexpected the former to fall limp at the end of a broken neck.
In accomplishing this the ape was tearing away the entire front of itsbreast, which was held in the vise-like grip of the powerful jaws.Back and forth upon the floor they rolled, neither one emitting a soundof fear or pain.  Presently I saw the great eyes of my beast bulgingcompletely from their sockets and blood flowing from its nostrils.That he was weakening perceptibly was evident, but so also was the ape,whose struggles were growing momentarily less.
Suddenly I came to myself and, with that strange instinct which seemsever to prompt me to my duty, I seized the cudgel, which had fallen tothe floor at the commencement of the battle, and swinging it with allthe power of my earthly arms I crashed it full upon the head of theape, crushing his skull as though it had been an eggshell.
Scarcely had the blow descended when I was confronted with a newdanger.  The ape's mate, recovered from its first shock of terror, hadreturned to the scene of the encounter by way of the interior of thebuilding.  I glimpsed him just before he reached the doorway and thesight of him, now roaring as he perceived his lifeless fellow stretchedupon the floor, and frothing at the mouth, in the extremity of hisrage, filled me, I must confess, with dire forebodings.
I am ever willing to stand and fight when the odds are not toooverwhelmingly against me, but in this instance I perceived neitherglory nor profit in pitting my relatively puny strength against theiron muscles and brutal ferocity of this enraged denizen of an unknownworld; in fact, the only outcome of such an encounter, so far as Imight be concerned, seemed sudden death.
I was standing near the window and I knew that once in the street Imight gain the plaza and safety before the creature could overtake me;at least there was a chance for safety in flight, against almostcertain death should I remain and fight however desperately.
It is true I held the cudgel, but what could I do with it against hisfour great arms?  Even should I break one of them with my first blow,for I figured that he would attempt to ward off the cudgel, he couldreach out and annihilate me with the others before I could recover fora second attack.
In the instant that these thoughts passed through my mind I had turnedto make for the window, but my eyes alighting on the form of myerstwhile guardian threw all thoughts of flight to the four winds.  Helay gasping upon the floor of the chamber, his great eyes fastened uponme in what seemed a pitiful appeal for protection.  I could notwithstand that look, nor could I, on second thought, have deserted myrescuer without giving as good an account of myself in his behalf as hehad in mine.
Without more ado, therefore, I turned to meet the charge of theinfuriated bull ape.  He was now too close upon me for the cudgel toprove of any effective assistance, so I merely threw it as heavily as Icould at his advancing bulk.  It struck him just below the knees,eliciting a howl of pain and rage, and so throwing him off his balancethat he lunged full upon me with arms wide stretched to ease his fall.
Again, as on the preceding day, I had recourse to earthly tactics, andswinging my right fist full upon the point of his chin I followed itwith a smashing left to the pit of his stomach.  The effect wasmarvelous, for, as I lightly sidestepped, after delivering the secondblow, he reeled and fell upon the floor doubled up with pain andgasping for wind.  Leaping over his prostrate body, I seized the cudgeland finished the monster before he could regain his feet.
As I delivered the blow a low laugh rang out behind me, and, turning, Ibeheld Tars Tarkas, Sola, and three or four warriors standing in thedoorway of the chamber.  As my eyes met theirs I was, for the secondtime, the recipient of their zealously guarded applause.
My absence had been noted by Sola on her awakening, and she had quicklyinformed Tars Tarkas, who had set out immediately with a handful ofwarriors to search for me.  As they had approached the limits of thecity they had witnessed the actions of the bull ape as he bolted intothe building, frothing with rage.
They had followed immediately behind him, thinking it barely possiblethat his actions might prove a clew to my whereabouts and had witnessedmy short but decisive battle with him.  This encounter, together withmy set-to with the Martian warrior on the previous day and my feats ofjumping placed me upon a high pinnacle in their regard.  Evidentlydevoid of all the finer sentiments of friendship, love, or affection,these people fairly worship physical prowess and bravery, and nothingis too good for the object of their adoration as long as he maintainshis position by repeated examples of his skill, strength, and courage.
Sola, who had accompanied the searching party of her own volition, wasthe only one of the Martians whose face had not been twisted inlaughter as I battled for my life.  She, on the contrary, was soberwith apparent solicitude and, as soon as I had finished the monster,rushed to me and carefully examined my body for possible wounds orinjuries.  Satisfying herself that I had come off unscathed she smiledquietly, and, taking my hand, started toward the door of the chamber.
Tars Tarkas and the other warriors had entered and were standing overthe now rapidly reviving brute which had saved my life, and whose lifeI, in turn, had rescued.  They seemed to be deep in argument, andfinally one of them addressed me, but remembering my ignorance of hislanguage turned back to Tars Tarkas, who, with a word and gesture, gavesome command to the fellow and turned to follow us from the room.
There seemed something menacing in their attitude toward my beast, andI hesitated to leave until I had learned the outcome.  It was well Idid so, for the warrior drew an evil looking pistol from its holsterand was on the point of putting an end to the creature when I sprangforward and struck up his arm.  The bullet striking the wooden casingof the window exploded, blowing a hole completely through the wood andmasonry.
I then knelt down beside the fearsome-looking thing, and raising it toits feet motioned for it to follow me.  The looks of surprise which myactions elicited from the Martians were ludicrous; they could notunderstand, except in a feeble and childish way, such attributes asgratitude and compassion.  The warrior whose gun I had struck up lookedenquiringly at Tars Tarkas, but the latter signed that I be left to myown devices, and so we returned to the plaza with my great beastfollowing close at heel, and Sola grasping me tightly by the arm.
I had at least two friends on Mars; a young woman who watched over mewith motherly solicitude, and a dumb brute which, as I later came toknow, held in its poor ugly carcass more love, more loyalty, moregratitude than could have been found in the entire five million greenMartians who rove the deserted cities and dead sea bottoms of Mars.



CHAPTER VII
CHILD-RAISING ON MARS

After a breakfast, which was an exact replica of the meal of thepreceding day and an index of practically every meal which followedwhile I was with the green men of Mars, Sola escorted me to the plaza,where I found the entire community engaged in watching or helping atthe harnessing of huge mastodonian animals to great three-wheeledchariots.  There were about two hundred and fifty of these vehicles,each drawn by a single animal, any one of which, from their appearance,might easily have drawn the entire wagon train when fully loaded.
The chariots themselves were large, commodious, and gorgeouslydecorated.  In each was seated a female Martian loaded with ornamentsof metal, with jewels and silks and furs, and upon the back of each ofthe beasts which drew the chariots was perched a young Martian driver.Like the animals upon which the warriors were mounted, the heavierdraft animals wore neither bit nor bridle, but were guided entirely bytelepathic means.
This power is wonderfully developed in all Martians, and accountslargely for the simplicity of their language and the relatively fewspoken words exchanged even in long conversations.  It is the universallanguage of Mars, through the medium of which the higher and loweranimals of this world of paradoxes are able to communicate to a greateror less extent, depending upon the intellectual sphere of the speciesand the development of the individual.
As the cavalcade took up the line of march in single file, Sola draggedme into an empty chariot and we proceeded with the procession towardthe point by which I had entered the city the day before.  At the headof the caravan rode some two hundred warriors, five abreast, and a likenumber brought up the rear, while twenty-five or thirty outridersflanked us on either side.
Every one but myself--men, women, and children--were heavily armed, andat the tail of each chariot trotted a Martian hound, my own beastfollowing closely behind ours; in fact, the faithful creature neverleft me voluntarily during the entire ten years I spent on Mars.  Ourway led out across the little valley before the city, through thehills, and down into the dead sea bottom which I had traversed on myjourney from the incubator to the plaza.  The incubator, as it proved,was the terminal point of our journey this day, and, as the entirecavalcade broke into a mad gallop as soon as we reached the levelexpanse of sea bottom, we were soon within sight of our goal.
On reaching it the chariots were parked with military precision on thefour sides of the enclosure, and half a score of warriors, headed bythe enormous chieftain, and including Tars Tarkas and several otherlesser chiefs, dismounted and advanced toward it.  I could see TarsTarkas explaining something to the principal chieftain, whose name, bythe way, was, as nearly as I can translate it into English, LorquasPtomel, Jed; jed being his title.
I was soon appraised of the subject of their conversation, as, callingto Sola, Tars Tarkas signed for her to send me to him.  I had by thistime mastered the intricacies of walking under Martian conditions, andquickly responding to his command I advanced to the side of theincubator where the warriors stood.
As I reached their side a glance showed me that all but a very few eggshad hatched, the incubator being fairly alive with the hideous littledevils.  They ranged in height from three to four feet, and were movingrestlessly about the enclosure as though searching for food.
As I came to a halt before him, Tars Tarkas pointed over the incubatorand said, "Sak."  I saw that he wanted me to repeat my performance ofyesterday for the edification of Lorquas Ptomel, and, as I must confessthat my prowess gave me no little satisfaction, I responded quickly,leaping entirely over the parked chariots on the far side of theincubator.  As I returned, Lorquas Ptomel grunted something at me, andturning to his warriors gave a few words of command relative to theincubator.  They paid no further attention to me and I was thuspermitted to remain close and watch their operations, which consistedin breaking an opening in the wall of the incubator large enough topermit of the exit of the young Martians.
On either side of this opening the women and the younger Martians, bothmale and female, formed two solid walls leading out through thechariots and quite away into the plain beyond.  Between these walls thelittle Martians scampered, wild as deer; being permitted to run thefull length of the aisle, where they were captured one at a time by thewomen and older children; the last in the line capturing the firstlittle one to reach the end of the gauntlet, her opposite in the linecapturing the second, and so on until all the little fellows had leftthe enclosure and been appropriated by some youth or female.  As thewomen caught the young they fell out of line and returned to theirrespective chariots, while those who fell into the hands of the youngmen were later turned over to some of the women.
I saw that the ceremony, if it could be dignified by such a name, wasover, and seeking out Sola I found her in our chariot with a hideouslittle creature held tightly in her arms.
The work of rearing young, green Martians consists solely in teachingthem to talk, and to use the weapons of warfare with which they areloaded down from the very first year of their lives.  Coming from eggsin which they have lain for five years, the period of incubation, theystep forth into the world perfectly developed except in size.  Entirelyunknown to their mothers, who, in turn, would have difficulty inpointing out the fathers with any degree of accuracy, they are thecommon children of the community, and their education devolves upon thefemales who chance to capture them as they leave the incubator.
Their foster mothers may not even have had an egg in the incubator, aswas the case with Sola, who had not commenced to lay, until less than ayear before she became the mother of another woman's offspring.  Butthis counts for little among the green Martians, as parental and filiallove is as unknown to them as it is common among us.  I believe thishorrible system which has been carried on for ages is the direct causeof the loss of all the finer feelings and higher humanitarian instinctsamong these poor creatures.  From birth they know no father or motherlove, they know not the meaning of the word home; they are taught thatthey are only suffered to live until they can demonstrate by theirphysique and ferocity that they are fit to live.  Should they provedeformed or defective in any way they are promptly shot; nor do theysee a tear shed for a single one of the many cruel hardships they passthrough from earliest infancy.
I do not mean that the adult Martians are unnecessarily orintentionally cruel to the young, but theirs is a hard and pitilessstruggle for existence upon a dying planet, the natural resources ofwhich have dwindled to a point where the support of each additionallife means an added tax upon the community into which it is thrown.
By careful selection they rear only the hardiest specimens of eachspecies, and with almost supernatural foresight they regulate the birthrate to merely offset the loss by death.
Each adult Martian female brings forth about thirteen eggs each year,and those which meet the size, weight, and specific gravity tests arehidden in the recesses of some subterranean vault where the temperatureis too low for incubation.  Every year these eggs are carefullyexamined by a council of twenty chieftains, and all but about onehundred of the most perfect are destroyed out of each yearly supply.At the end of five years about five hundred almost perfect eggs havebeen chosen from the thousands brought forth.  These are then placed inthe almost air-tight incubators to be hatched by the sun's rays after aperiod of another five years.  The hatching which we had witnessedtoday was a fairly representative event of its kind, all but about oneper cent of the eggs hatching in two days.  If the remaining eggs everhatched we knew nothing of the fate of the little Martians.  They werenot wanted, as their offspring might inherit and transmit the tendencyto prolonged incubation, and thus upset the system which has maintainedfor ages and which permits the adult Martians to figure the proper timefor return to the incubators, almost to an hour.
The incubators are built in remote fastnesses, where there is little orno likelihood of their being discovered by other tribes.  The result ofsuch a catastrophe would mean no children in the community for anotherfive years.  I was later to witness the results of the discovery of analien incubator.
The community of which the green Martians with whom my lot was castformed a part was composed of some thirty thousand souls.  They roamedan enormous tract of arid and semi-arid land between forty and eightydegrees south latitude, and bounded on the east and west by two largefertile tracts.  Their headquarters lay in the southwest corner of thisdistrict, near the crossing of two of the so-called Martian canals.
As the incubator had been placed far north of their own territory in asupposedly uninhabited and unfrequented area, we had before us atremendous journey, concerning which I, of course, knew nothing.
After our return to the dead city I passed several days in comparativeidleness.  On the day following our return all the warriors had riddenforth early in the morning and had not returned until just beforedarkness fell.  As I later learned, they had been to the subterraneanvaults in which the eggs were kept and had transported them to theincubator, which they had then walled up for another five years, andwhich, in all probability, would not be visited again during thatperiod.
The vaults which hid the eggs until they were ready for the incubatorwere located many miles south of the incubator, and would be visitedyearly by the council of twenty chieftains.  Why they did not arrangeto build their vaults and incubators nearer home has always been amystery to me, and, like many other Martian mysteries, unsolved andunsolvable by earthly reasoning and customs.
Sola's duties were now doubled, as she was compelled to care for theyoung Martian as well as for me, but neither one of us required muchattention, and as we were both about equally advanced in Martianeducation, Sola took it upon herself to train us together.
Her prize consisted in a male about four feet tall, very strong andphysically perfect; also, he learned quickly, and we had considerableamusement, at least I did, over the keen rivalry we displayed.  TheMartian language, as I have said, is extremely simple, and in a week Icould make all my wants known and understand nearly everything that wassaid to me.  Likewise, under Sola's tutelage, I developed my telepathicpowers so that I shortly could sense practically everything that wenton around me.
What surprised Sola most in me was that while I could catch telepathicmessages easily from others, and often when they were not intended forme, no one could read a jot from my mind under any circumstances.  Atfirst this vexed me, but later I was very glad of it, as it gave me anundoubted advantage over the Martians.



CHAPTER VIII
A FAIR CAPTIVE FROM THE SKY

The third day after the incubator ceremony we set forth toward home,but scarcely had the head of the procession debouched into the openground before the city than orders were given for an immediate andhasty return.  As though trained for years in this particularevolution, the green Martians melted like mist into the spaciousdoorways of the nearby buildings, until, in less than three minutes,the entire cavalcade of chariots, mastodons and mounted warriors wasnowhere to be seen.
Sola and I had entered a building upon the front of the city, in fact,the same one in which I had had my encounter with the apes, and,wishing to see what had caused the sudden retreat, I mounted to anupper floor and peered from the window out over the valley and thehills beyond; and there I saw the cause of their sudden scurrying tocover.  A huge craft, long, low, and gray-painted, swung slowly overthe crest of the nearest hill.  Following it came another, and another,and another, until twenty of them, swinging low above the ground,sailed slowly and majestically toward us.
Each carried a strange banner swung from stem to stern above the upperworks, and upon the prow of each was painted some odd device thatgleamed in the sunlight and showed plainly even at the distance atwhich we were from the vessels.  I could see figures crowding theforward decks and upper works of the air craft.  Whether they haddiscovered us or simply were looking at the deserted city I could notsay, but in any event they received a rude reception, for suddenly andwithout warning the green Martian warriors fired a terrific volley fromthe windows of the buildings facing the little valley across which thegreat ships were so peacefully advancing.
Instantly the scene changed as by magic; the foremost vessel swungbroadside toward us, and bringing her guns into play returned our fire,at the same time moving parallel to our front for a short distance andthen turning back with the evident intention of completing a greatcircle which would bring her up to position once more opposite ourfiring line; the other vessels followed in her wake, each one openingupon us as she swung into position.  Our own fire never diminished, andI doubt if twenty-five per cent of our shots went wild.  It had neverbeen given me to see such deadly accuracy of aim, and it seemed asthough a little figure on one of the craft dropped at the explosion ofeach bullet, while the banners and upper works dissolved in spurts offlame as the irresistible projectiles of our warriors mowed throughthem.
The fire from the vessels was most ineffectual, owing, as I afterwardlearned, to the unexpected suddenness of the first volley, which caughtthe ship's crews entirely unprepared and the sighting apparatus of theguns unprotected from the deadly aim of our warriors.
It seems that each green warrior has certain objective points for hisfire under relatively identical circumstances of warfare.  For example,a proportion of them, always the best marksmen, direct their fireentirely upon the wireless finding and sighting apparatus of the bigguns of an attacking naval force; another detail attends to the smallerguns in the same way; others pick off the gunners; still others theofficers; while certain other quotas concentrate their attention uponthe other members of the crew, upon the upper works, and upon thesteering gear and propellers.
Twenty minutes after the first volley the great fleet swung trailingoff in the direction from which it had first appeared.  Several of thecraft were limping perceptibly, and seemed but barely under the controlof their depleted crews.  Their fire had ceased entirely and all theirenergies seemed focused upon escape.  Our warriors then rushed up tothe roofs of the buildings which we occupied and followed theretreating armada with a continuous fusillade of deadly fire.
One by one, however, the ships managed to dip below the crests of theoutlying hills until only one barely moving craft was in sight.  Thishad received the brunt of our fire and seemed to be entirely unmanned,as not a moving figure was visible upon her decks.  Slowly she swungfrom her course, circling back toward us in an erratic and pitifulmanner.  Instantly the warriors ceased firing, for it was quiteapparent that the vessel was entirely helpless, and, far from being ina position to inflict harm upon us, she could not even control herselfsufficiently to escape.
As she neared the city the warriors rushed out upon the plain to meether, but it was evident that she still was too high for them to hope toreach her decks.  From my vantage point in the window I could see thebodies of her crew strewn about, although I could not make out whatmanner of creatures they might be.  Not a sign of life was manifestupon her as she drifted slowly with the light breeze in a southeasterlydirection.
She was drifting some fifty feet above the ground, followed by all butsome hundred of the warriors who had been ordered back to the roofs tocover the possibility of a return of the fleet, or of reinforcements.It soon became evident that she would strike the face of the buildingsabout a mile south of our position, and as I watched the progress ofthe chase I saw a number of warriors gallop ahead, dismount and enterthe building she seemed destined to touch.
As the craft neared the building, and just before she struck, theMartian warriors swarmed upon her from the windows, and with theirgreat spears eased the shock of the collision, and in a few momentsthey had thrown out grappling hooks and the big boat was being hauledto ground by their fellows below.
After making her fast, they swarmed the sides and searched the vesselfrom stem to stern.  I could see them examining the dead sailors,evidently for signs of life, and presently a party of them appearedfrom below dragging a little figure among them.  The creature wasconsiderably less than half as tall as the green Martian warriors, andfrom my balcony I could see that it walked erect upon two legs andsurmised that it was some new and strange Martian monstrosity withwhich I had not as yet become acquainted.
They removed their prisoner to the ground and then commenced asystematic rifling of the vessel.  This operation required severalhours, during which time a number of the chariots were requisitioned totransport the loot, which consisted in arms, ammunition, silks, furs,jewels, strangely carved stone vessels, and a quantity of solid foodsand liquids, including many casks of water, the first I had seen sincemy advent upon Mars.
After the last load had been removed the warriors made lines fast tothe craft and towed her far out into the valley in a southwesterlydirection.  A few of them then boarded her and were busily engaged inwhat appeared, from my distant position, as the emptying of thecontents of various carboys upon the dead bodies of the sailors andover the decks and works of the vessel.
This operation concluded, they hastily clambered over her sides,sliding down the guy ropes to the ground.  The last warrior to leavethe deck turned and threw something back upon the vessel, waiting aninstant to note the outcome of his act.  As a faint spurt of flame rosefrom the point where the missile struck he swung over the side and wasquickly upon the ground.  Scarcely had he alighted than the guy ropeswere simultaneous released, and the great warship, lightened by theremoval of the loot, soared majestically into the air, her decks andupper works a mass of roaring flames.
Slowly she drifted to the southeast, rising higher and higher as theflames ate away her wooden parts and diminished the weight upon her.Ascending to the roof of the building I watched her for hours, untilfinally she was lost in the dim vistas of the distance.  The sight wasawe-inspiring in the extreme as one contemplated this mighty floatingfuneral pyre, drifting unguided and unmanned through the lonely wastesof the Martian heavens; a derelict of death and destruction, typifyingthe life story of these strange and ferocious creatures into whoseunfriendly hands fate had carried it.
Much depressed, and, to me, unaccountably so, I slowly descended to thestreet.  The scene I had witnessed seemed to mark the defeat andannihilation of the forces of a kindred people, rather than the routingby our green warriors of a horde of similar, though unfriendly,creatures.  I could not fathom the seeming hallucination, nor could Ifree myself from it; but somewhere in the innermost recesses of my soulI felt a strange yearning toward these unknown foemen, and a mightyhope surged through me that the fleet would return and demand areckoning from the green warriors who had so ruthlessly and wantonlyattacked it.
Close at my heel, in his now accustomed place, followed Woola, thehound, and as I emerged upon the street Sola rushed up to me as thoughI had been the object of some search on her part.  The cavalcade wasreturning to the plaza, the homeward march having been given up forthat day; nor, in fact, was it recommenced for more than a week, owingto the fear of a return attack by the air craft.
Lorquas Ptomel was too astute an old warrior to be caught upon the openplains with a caravan of chariots and children, and so we remained atthe deserted city until the danger seemed passed.
As Sola and I entered the plaza a sight met my eyes which filled mywhole being with a great surge of mingled hope, fear, exultation, anddepression, and yet most dominant was a subtle sense of relief andhappiness; for just as we neared the throng of Martians I caught aglimpse of the prisoner from the battle craft who was being roughlydragged into a nearby building by a couple of green Martian females.
And the sight which met my eyes was that of a slender, girlish figure,similar in every detail to the earthly women of my past life.  She didnot see me at first, but just as she was disappearing through theportal of the building which was to be her prison she turned, and hereyes met mine.  Her face was oval and beautiful in the extreme, herevery feature was finely chiseled and exquisite, her eyes large andlustrous and her head surmounted by a mass of coal black, waving hair,caught loosely into a strange yet becoming coiffure.  Her skin was of alight reddish copper color, against which the crimson glow of hercheeks and the ruby of her beautifully molded lips shone with astrangely enhancing effect.
She was as destitute of clothes as the green Martians who accompaniedher; indeed, save for her highly wrought ornaments she was entirelynaked, nor could any apparel have enhanced the beauty of her perfectand symmetrical figure.
As her gaze rested on me her eyes opened wide in astonishment, and shemade a little sign with her free hand; a sign which I did not, ofcourse, understand.  Just a moment we gazed upon each other, and thenthe look of hope and renewed courage which had glorified her face asshe discovered me, faded into one of utter dejection, mingled withloathing and contempt.  I realized I had not answered her signal, andignorant as I was of Martian customs, I intuitively felt that she hadmade an appeal for succor and protection which my unfortunate ignorancehad prevented me from answering.  And then she was dragged out of mysight into the depths of the deserted edifice.



CHAPTER IX
I LEARN THE LANGUAGE

As I came back to myself I glanced at Sola, who had witnessed thisencounter and I was surprised to note a strange expression upon herusually expressionless countenance.  What her thoughts were I did notknow, for as yet I had learned but little of the Martian tongue; enoughonly to suffice for my daily needs.
As I reached the doorway of our building a strange surprise awaited me.A warrior approached bearing the arms, ornaments, and fullaccouterments of his kind.  These he presented to me with a fewunintelligible words, and a bearing at once respectful and menacing.
Later, Sola, with the aid of several of the other women, remodeled thetrappings to fit my lesser proportions, and after they completed thework I went about garbed in all the panoply of war.
From then on Sola instructed me in the mysteries of the variousweapons, and with the Martian young I spent several hours each daypracticing upon the plaza.  I was not yet proficient with all theweapons, but my great familiarity with similar earthly weapons made mean unusually apt pupil, and I progressed in a very satisfactory manner.
The training of myself and the young Martians was conducted solely bythe women, who not only attend to the education of the young in thearts of individual defense and offense, but are also the artisans whoproduce every manufactured article wrought by the green Martians.  Theymake the powder, the cartridges, the firearms; in fact everything ofvalue is produced by the females.  In time of actual warfare they forma part of the reserves, and when the necessity arises fight with evengreater intelligence and ferocity than the men.
The men are trained in the higher branches of the art of war; instrategy and the maneuvering of large bodies of troops.  They make thelaws as they are needed; a new law for each emergency.  They areunfettered by precedent in the administration of justice.  Customs havebeen handed down by ages of repetition, but the punishment for ignoringa custom is a matter for individual treatment by a jury of theculprit's peers, and I may say that justice seldom misses fire, butseems rather to rule in inverse ratio to the ascendency of law.  In onerespect at least the Martians are a happy people; they have no lawyers.
I did not see the prisoner again for several days subsequent to ourfirst encounter, and then only to catch a fleeting glimpse of her asshe was being conducted to the great audience chamber where I had hadmy first meeting with Lorquas Ptomel.  I could not but note theunnecessary harshness and brutality with which her guards treated her;so different from the almost maternal kindliness which Sola manifestedtoward me, and the respectful attitude of the few green Martians whotook the trouble to notice me at all.
I had observed on the two occasions when I had seen her that theprisoner exchanged words with her guards, and this convinced me thatthey spoke, or at least could make themselves understood by a commonlanguage.  With this added incentive I nearly drove Sola distracted bymy importunities to hasten on my education and within a few more days Ihad mastered the Martian tongue sufficiently well to enable me to carryon a passable conversation and to fully understand practically all thatI heard.
At this time our sleeping quarters were occupied by three or fourfemales and a couple of the recently hatched young, beside Sola and heryouthful ward, myself, and Woola the hound.  After they had retired forthe night it was customary for the adults to carry on a desultoryconversation for a short time before lapsing into sleep, and now that Icould understand their language I was always a keen listener, althoughI never proffered any remarks myself.
On the night following the prisoner's visit to the audience chamber theconversation finally fell upon this subject, and I was all ears on theinstant.  I had feared to question Sola relative to the beautifulcaptive, as I could not but recall the strange expression I had notedupon her face after my first encounter with the prisoner.  That itdenoted jealousy I could not say, and yet, judging all things bymundane standards as I still did, I felt it safer to affectindifference in the matter until I learned more surely Sola's attitudetoward the object of my solicitude.
Sarkoja, one of the older women who shared our domicile, had beenpresent at the audience as one of the captive's guards, and it wastoward her the question turned.
"When," asked one of the women, "will we enjoy the death throes of thered one? or does Lorquas Ptomel, Jed, intend holding her for ransom?"
"They have decided to carry her with us back to Thark, and exhibit herlast agonies at the great games before Tal Hajus," replied Sarkoja.
"What will be the manner of her going out?" inquired Sola.  "She isvery small and very beautiful; I had hoped that they would hold her forransom."
Sarkoja and the other women grunted angrily at this evidence ofweakness on the part of Sola.
"It is sad, Sola, that you were not born a million years ago," snappedSarkoja, "when all the hollows of the land were filled with water, andthe peoples were as soft as the stuff they sailed upon.  In our day wehave progressed to a point where such sentiments mark weakness andatavism.  It will not be well for you to permit Tars Tarkas to learnthat you hold such degenerate sentiments, as I doubt that he would careto entrust such as you with the grave responsibilities of maternity."
"I see nothing wrong with my expression of interest in this red woman,"retorted Sola.  "She has never harmed us, nor would she should we havefallen into her hands.  It is only the men of her kind who war upon us,and I have ever thought that their attitude toward us is but thereflection of ours toward them.  They live at peace with all theirfellows, except when duty calls upon them to make war, while we are atpeace with none; forever warring among our own kind as well as upon thered men, and even in our own communities the individuals fight amongstthemselves.  Oh, it is one continual, awful period of bloodshed fromthe time we break the shell until we gladly embrace the bosom of theriver of mystery, the dark and ancient Iss which carries us to anunknown, but at least no more frightful and terrible existence!Fortunate indeed is he who meets his end in an early death.  Say whatyou please to Tars Tarkas, he can mete out no worse fate to me than acontinuation of the horrible existence we are forced to lead in thislife."
This wild outbreak on the part of Sola so greatly surprised and shockedthe other women, that, after a few words of general reprimand, they alllapsed into silence and were soon asleep.  One thing the episode hadaccomplished was to assure me of Sola's friendliness toward the poorgirl, and also to convince me that I had been extremely fortunate infalling into her hands rather than those of some of the other females.I knew that she was fond of me, and now that I had discovered that shehated cruelty and barbarity I was confident that I could depend uponher to aid me and the girl captive to escape, provided of course thatsuch a thing was within the range of possibilities.
I did not even know that there were any better conditions to escape to,but I was more than willing to take my chances among people fashionedafter my own mold rather than to remain longer among the hideous andbloodthirsty green men of Mars.  But where to go, and how, was as muchof a puzzle to me as the age-old search for the spring of eternal lifehas been to earthly men since the beginning of time.
I decided that at the first opportunity I would take Sola into myconfidence and openly ask her to aid me, and with this resolutionstrong upon me I turned among my silks and furs and slept the dreamlessand refreshing sleep of Mars.



CHAPTER X
CHAMPION AND CHIEF

Early the next morning I was astir.  Considerable freedom was allowedme, as Sola had informed me that so long as I did not attempt to leavethe city I was free to go and come as I pleased.  She had warned me,however, against venturing forth unarmed, as this city, like all otherdeserted metropolises of an ancient Martian civilization, was peopledby the great white apes of my second day's adventure.
In advising me that I must not leave the boundaries of the city Solahad explained that Woola would prevent this anyway should I attempt it,and she warned me most urgently not to arouse his fierce nature byignoring his warnings should I venture too close to the forbiddenterritory.  His nature was such, she said, that he would bring me backinto the city dead or alive should I persist in opposing him;"preferably dead," she added.
On this morning I had chosen a new street to explore when suddenly Ifound myself at the limits of the city.  Before me were low hillspierced by narrow and inviting ravines.  I longed to explore thecountry before me, and, like the pioneer stock from which I sprang, toview what the landscape beyond the encircling hills might disclose fromthe summits which shut out my view.
It also occurred to me that this would prove an excellent opportunityto test the qualities of Woola.  I was convinced that the brute lovedme; I had seen more evidences of affection in him than in any otherMartian animal, man or beast, and I was sure that gratitude for theacts that had twice saved his life would more than outweigh his loyaltyto the duty imposed upon him by cruel and loveless masters.
As I approached the boundary line Woola ran anxiously before me, andthrust his body against my legs.  His expression was pleading ratherthan ferocious, nor did he bare his great tusks or utter his fearfulguttural warnings.  Denied the friendship and companionship of my kind,I had developed considerable affection for Woola and Sola, for thenormal earthly man must have some outlet for his natural affections,and so I decided upon an appeal to a like instinct in this great brute,sure that I would not be disappointed.
I had never petted nor fondled him, but now I sat upon the ground andputting my arms around his heavy neck I stroked and coaxed him, talkingin my newly acquired Martian tongue as I would have to my hound athome, as I would have talked to any other friend among the loweranimals.  His response to my manifestation of affection was remarkableto a degree; he stretched his great mouth to its full width, baring theentire expanse of his upper rows of tusks and wrinkling his snout untilhis great eyes were almost hidden by the folds of flesh.  If you haveever seen a collie smile you may have some idea of Woola's facialdistortion.
He threw himself upon his back and fairly wallowed at my feet; jumpedup and sprang upon me, rolling me upon the ground by his great weight;then wriggling and squirming around me like a playful puppy presentingits back for the petting it craves.  I could not resist theludicrousness of the spectacle, and holding my sides I rocked back andforth in the first laughter which had passed my lips in many days; thefirst, in fact, since the morning Powell had left camp when his horse,long unused, had precipitately and unexpectedly bucked him offheadforemost into a pot of frijoles.
My laughter frightened Woola, his antics ceased and he crawledpitifully toward me, poking his ugly head far into my lap; and then Iremembered what laughter signified on Mars--torture, suffering, death.Quieting myself, I rubbed the poor old fellow's head and back, talkedto him for a few minutes, and then in an authoritative tone commandedhim to follow me, and arising started for the hills.
There was no further question of authority between us; Woola was mydevoted slave from that moment hence, and I his only and undisputedmaster.  My walk to the hills occupied but a few minutes, and I foundnothing of particular interest to reward me.  Numerous brilliantlycolored and strangely formed wild flowers dotted the ravines and fromthe summit of the first hill I saw still other hills stretching offtoward the north, and rising, one range above another, until lost inmountains of quite respectable dimensions; though I afterward foundthat only a few peaks on all Mars exceed four thousand feet in height;the suggestion of magnitude was merely relative.
My morning's walk had been large with importance to me for it hadresulted in a perfect understanding with Woola, upon whom Tars Tarkasrelied for my safe keeping.  I now knew that while theoretically aprisoner I was virtually free, and I hastened to regain the city limitsbefore the defection of Woola could be discovered by his erstwhilemasters.  The adventure decided me never again to leave the limits ofmy prescribed stamping grounds until I was ready to venture forth forgood and all, as it would certainly result in a curtailment of myliberties, as well as the probable death of Woola, were we to bediscovered.
On regaining the plaza I had my third glimpse of the captive girl.  Shewas standing with her guards before the entrance to the audiencechamber, and as I approached she gave me one haughty glance and turnedher back full upon me.  The act was so womanly, so earthly womanly,that though it stung my pride it also warmed my heart with a feeling ofcompanionship; it was good to know that someone else on Mars besidemyself had human instincts of a civilized order, even though themanifestation of them was so painful and mortifying.
Had a green Martian woman desired to show dislike or contempt shewould, in all likelihood, have done it with a sword thrust or amovement of her trigger finger; but as their sentiments are mostlyatrophied it would have required a serious injury to have aroused suchpassions in them.  Sola, let me add, was an exception; I never saw herperform a cruel or uncouth act, or fail in uniform kindliness and goodnature.  She was indeed, as her fellow Martian had said of her, anatavism; a dear and precious reversion to a former type of loved andloving ancestor.
Seeing that the prisoner seemed the center of attraction I halted toview the proceedings.  I had not long to wait for presently LorquasPtomel and his retinue of chieftains approached the building and,signing the guards to follow with the prisoner entered the audiencechamber.  Realizing that I was a somewhat favored character, and alsoconvinced that the warriors did not know of my proficiency in theirlanguage, as I had pleaded with Sola to keep this a secret on thegrounds that I did not wish to be forced to talk with the men until Ihad perfectly mastered the Martian tongue, I chanced an attempt toenter the audience chamber and listen to the proceedings.
The council squatted upon the steps of the rostrum, while below themstood the prisoner and her two guards.  I saw that one of the women wasSarkoja, and thus understood how she had been present at the hearing ofthe preceding day, the results of which she had reported to theoccupants of our dormitory last night.  Her attitude toward the captivewas most harsh and brutal.  When she held her, she sunk her rudimentarynails into the poor girl's flesh, or twisted her arm in a most painfulmanner.  When it was necessary to move from one spot to another sheeither jerked her roughly, or pushed her headlong before her.  Sheseemed to be venting upon this poor defenseless creature all thehatred, cruelty, ferocity, and spite of her nine hundred years, backedby unguessable ages of fierce and brutal ancestors.
The other woman was less cruel because she was entirely indifferent; ifthe prisoner had been left to her alone, and fortunately she was atnight, she would have received no harsh treatment, nor, by the sametoken would she have received any attention at all.
As Lorquas Ptomel raised his eyes to address the prisoner they fell onme and he turned to Tars Tarkas with a word, and gesture of impatience.Tars Tarkas made some reply which I could not catch, but which causedLorquas Ptomel to smile; after which they paid no further attention tome.
"What is your name?" asked Lorquas Ptomel, addressing the prisoner.
"Dejah Thoris, daughter of Mors Kajak of Helium."
"And the nature of your expedition?" he continued.
"It was a purely scientific research party sent out by my father'sfather, the Jeddak of Helium, to rechart the air currents, and to takeatmospheric density tests," replied the fair prisoner, in a low,well-modulated voice.
"We were unprepared for battle," she continued, "as we were on apeaceful mission, as our banners and the colors of our craft denoted.The work we were doing was as much in your interests as in ours, foryou know full well that were it not for our labors and the fruits ofour scientific operations there would not be enough air or water onMars to support a single human life.  For ages we have maintained theair and water supply at practically the same point without anappreciable loss, and we have done this in the face of the brutal andignorant interference of your green men.
"Why, oh, why will you not learn to live in amity with your fellows,must you ever go on down the ages to your final extinction but littleabove the plane of the dumb brutes that serve you!  A people withoutwritten language, without art, without homes, without love; the victimof eons of the horrible community idea.  Owning everything in common,even to your women and children, has resulted in your owning nothing incommon.  You hate each other as you hate all else except yourselves.Come back to the ways of our common ancestors, come back to the lightof kindliness and fellowship.  The way is open to you, you will findthe hands of the red men stretched out to aid you.  Together we may dostill more to regenerate our dying planet.  The granddaughter of thegreatest and mightiest of the red jeddaks has asked you.  Will youcome?"
Lorquas Ptomel and the warriors sat looking silently and intently atthe young woman for several moments after she had ceased speaking.What was passing in their minds no man may know, but that they weremoved I truly believe, and if one man high among them had been strongenough to rise above custom, that moment would have marked a new andmighty era for Mars.
I saw Tars Tarkas rise to speak, and on his face was such an expressionas I had never seen upon the countenance of a green Martian warrior.It bespoke an inward and mighty battle with self, with heredity, withage-old custom, and as he opened his mouth to speak, a look almost ofbenignity, of kindliness, momentarily lighted up his fierce andterrible countenance.
What words of moment were to have fallen from his lips were neverspoken, as just then a young warrior, evidently sensing the trend ofthought among the older men, leaped down from the steps of the rostrum,and striking the frail captive a powerful blow across the face, whichfelled her to the floor, placed his foot upon her prostrate form andturning toward the assembled council broke into peals of horrid,mirthless laughter.
For an instant I thought Tars Tarkas would strike him dead, nor did theaspect of Lorquas Ptomel augur any too favorably for the brute, but themood passed, their old selves reasserted their ascendency, and theysmiled.  It was portentous however that they did not laugh aloud, forthe brute's act constituted a side-splitting witticism according to theethics which rule green Martian humor.
That I have taken moments to write down a part of what occurred as thatblow fell does not signify that I remained inactive for any such lengthof time.  I think I must have sensed something of what was coming, forI realize now that I was crouched as for a spring as I saw the blowaimed at her beautiful, upturned, pleading face, and ere the handdescended I was halfway across the hall.
Scarcely had his hideous laugh rang out but once, when I was upon him.The brute was twelve feet in height and armed to the teeth, but Ibelieve that I could have accounted for the whole roomful in theterrific intensity of my rage.  Springing upward, I struck him full inthe face as he turned at my warning cry and then as he drew hisshort-sword I drew mine and sprang up again upon his breast, hookingone leg over the butt of his pistol and grasping one of his huge tuskswith my left hand while I delivered blow after blow upon his enormouschest.
He could not use his short-sword to advantage because I was too closeto him, nor could he draw his pistol, which he attempted to do indirect opposition to Martian custom which says that you may not fight afellow warrior in private combat with any other than the weapon withwhich you are attacked.  In fact he could do nothing but make a wildand futile attempt to dislodge me.  With all his immense bulk he waslittle if any stronger than I, and it was but the matter of a moment ortwo before he sank, bleeding and lifeless, to the floor.
Dejah Thoris had raised herself upon one elbow and was watching thebattle with wide, staring eyes.  When I had regained my feet I raisedher in my arms and bore her to one of the benches at the side of theroom.
Again no Martian interfered with me, and tearing a piece of silk frommy cape I endeavored to staunch the flow of blood from her nostrils.  Iwas soon successful as her injuries amounted to little more than anordinary nosebleed, and when she could speak she placed her hand uponmy arm and looking up into my eyes, said:
"Why did you do it?  You who refused me even friendly recognition inthe first hour of my peril!  And now you risk your life and kill one ofyour companions for my sake.  I cannot understand.  What strange mannerof man are you, that you consort with the green men, though your formis that of my race, while your color is little darker than that of thewhite ape?  Tell me, are you human, or are you more than human?"
"It is a strange tale," I replied, "too long to attempt to tell younow, and one which I so much doubt the credibility of myself that Ifear to hope that others will believe it.  Suffice it, for the present,that I am your friend, and, so far as our captors will permit, yourprotector and your servant."
"Then you too are a prisoner?  But why, then, those arms and theregalia of a Tharkian chieftain?  What is your name?  Where yourcountry?"
"Yes, Dejah Thoris, I too am a prisoner; my name is John Carter, and Iclaim Virginia, one of the United States of America, Earth, as my home;but why I am permitted to wear arms I do not know, nor was I aware thatmy regalia was that of a chieftain."
We were interrupted at this juncture by the approach of one of thewarriors, bearing arms, accouterments and ornaments, and in a flash oneof her questions was answered and a puzzle cleared up for me.  I sawthat the body of my dead antagonist had been stripped, and I read inthe menacing yet respectful attitude of the warrior who had brought methese trophies of the kill the same demeanor as that evinced by theother who had brought me my original equipment, and now for the firsttime I realized that my blow, on the occasion of my first battle in theaudience chamber had resulted in the death of my adversary.
The reason for the whole attitude displayed toward me was now apparent;I had won my spurs, so to speak, and in the crude justice, which alwaysmarks Martian dealings, and which, among other things, has caused me tocall her the planet of paradoxes, I was accorded the honors due aconqueror; the trappings and the position of the man I killed.  Intruth, I was a Martian chieftain, and this I learned later was thecause of my great freedom and my toleration in the audience chamber.
As I had turned to receive the dead warrior's chattels I had noticedthat Tars Tarkas and several others had pushed forward toward us, andthe eyes of the former rested upon me in a most quizzical manner.Finally he addressed me:
"You speak the tongue of Barsoom quite readily for one who was deaf anddumb to us a few short days ago.  Where did you learn it, John Carter?"
"You, yourself, are responsible, Tars Tarkas," I replied, "in that youfurnished me with an instructress of remarkable ability; I have tothank Sola for my learning."
"She has done well," he answered, "but your education in other respectsneeds considerable polish.  Do you know what your unprecedentedtemerity would have cost you had you failed to kill either of the twochieftains whose metal you now wear?"
"I presume that that one whom I had failed to kill, would have killedme," I answered, smiling.
"No, you are wrong.  Only in the last extremity of self-defense would aMartian warrior kill a prisoner; we like to save them for otherpurposes," and his face bespoke possibilities that were not pleasant todwell upon.
"But one thing can save you now," he continued.  "Should you, inrecognition of your remarkable valor, ferocity, and prowess, beconsidered by Tal Hajus as worthy of his service you may be taken intothe community and become a full-fledged Tharkian.  Until we reach theheadquarters of Tal Hajus it is the will of Lorquas Ptomel that you beaccorded the respect your acts have earned you.  You will be treated byus as a Tharkian chieftain, but you must not forget that every chiefwho ranks you is responsible for your safe delivery to our mighty andmost ferocious ruler.  I am done."
"I hear you, Tars Tarkas," I answered.  "As you know I am not ofBarsoom; your ways are not my ways, and I can only act in the future asI have in the past, in accordance with the dictates of my conscienceand guided by the standards of mine own people.  If you will leave mealone I will go in peace, but if not, let the individual Barsoomianswith whom I must deal either respect my rights as a stranger among you,or take whatever consequences may befall.  Of one thing let us be sure,whatever may be your ultimate intentions toward this unfortunate youngwoman, whoever would offer her injury or insult in the future mustfigure on making a full accounting to me.  I understand that youbelittle all sentiments of generosity and kindliness, but I do not, andI can convince your most doughty warrior that these characteristics arenot incompatible with an ability to fight."
Ordinarily I am not given to long speeches, nor ever before had Idescended to bombast, but I had guessed at the keynote which wouldstrike an answering chord in the breasts of the green Martians, nor wasI wrong, for my harangue evidently deeply impressed them, and theirattitude toward me thereafter was still further respectful.
Tars Tarkas himself seemed pleased with my reply, but his only commentwas more or less enigmatical--"And I think I know Tal Hajus, Jeddak ofThark."
I now turned my attention to Dejah Thoris, and assisting her to herfeet I turned with her toward the exit, ignoring her hovering guardianharpies as well as the inquiring glances of the chieftains.  Was I notnow a chieftain also!  Well, then, I would assume the responsibilitiesof one.  They did not molest us, and so Dejah Thoris, Princess ofHelium, and John Carter, gentleman of Virginia, followed by thefaithful Woola, passed through utter silence from the audience chamberof Lorquas Ptomel, Jed among the Tharks of Barsoom.



CHAPTER XI
WITH DEJAH THORIS

As we reached the open the two female guards who had been detailed towatch over Dejah Thoris hurried up and made as though to assume custodyof her once more.  The poor child shrank against me and I felt her twolittle hands fold tightly over my arm.  Waving the women away, Iinformed them that Sola would attend the captive hereafter, and Ifurther warned Sarkoja that any more of her cruel attentions bestowedupon Dejah Thoris would result in Sarkoja's sudden and painful demise.
My threat was unfortunate and resulted in more harm than good to DejahThoris, for, as I learned later, men do not kill women upon Mars, norwomen, men.  So Sarkoja merely gave us an ugly look and departed tohatch up deviltries against us.
I soon found Sola and explained to her that I wished her to guard DejahThoris as she had guarded me; that I wished her to find other quarterswhere they would not be molested by Sarkoja, and I finally informed herthat I myself would take up my quarters among the men.
Sola glanced at the accouterments which were carried in my hand andslung across my shoulder.
"You are a great chieftain now, John Carter," she said, "and I must doyour bidding, though indeed I am glad to do it under any circumstances.The man whose metal you carry was young, but he was a great warrior,and had by his promotions and kills won his way close to the rank ofTars Tarkas, who, as you know, is second to Lorquas Ptomel only.  Youare eleventh, there are but ten chieftains in this community who rankyou in prowess."
"And if I should kill Lorquas Ptomel?" I asked.
"You would be first, John Carter; but you may only win that honor bythe will of the entire council that Lorquas Ptomel meet you in combat,or should he attack you, you may kill him in self-defense, and thus winfirst place."
I laughed, and changed the subject.  I had no particular desire to killLorquas Ptomel, and less to be a jed among the Tharks.
I accompanied Sola and Dejah Thoris in a search for new quarters, whichwe found in a building nearer the audience chamber and of far morepretentious architecture than our former habitation.  We also found inthis building real sleeping apartments with ancient beds of highlywrought metal swinging from enormous gold chains depending from themarble ceilings.  The decoration of the walls was most elaborate, and,unlike the frescoes in the other buildings I had examined, portrayedmany human figures in the compositions.  These were of people likemyself, and of a much lighter color than Dejah Thoris.  They were cladin graceful, flowing robes, highly ornamented with metal and jewels,and their luxuriant hair was of a beautiful golden and reddish bronze.The men were beardless and only a few wore arms.  The scenes depictedfor the most part, a fair-skinned, fair-haired people at play.
Dejah Thoris clasped her hands with an exclamation of rapture as shegazed upon these magnificent works of art, wrought by a people longextinct; while Sola, on the other hand, apparently did not see them.
We decided to use this room, on the second floor and overlooking theplaza, for Dejah Thoris and Sola, and another room adjoining and in therear for the cooking and supplies.  I then dispatched Sola to bring thebedding and such food and utensils as she might need, telling her thatI would guard Dejah Thoris until her return.
As Sola departed Dejah Thoris turned to me with a faint smile.
"And whereto, then, would your prisoner escape should you leave her,unless it was to follow you and crave your protection, and ask yourpardon for the cruel thoughts she has harbored against you these pastfew days?"
"You are right," I answered, "there is no escape for either of usunless we go together."
"I heard your challenge to the creature you call Tars Tarkas, and Ithink I understand your position among these people, but what I cannotfathom is your statement that you are not of Barsoom."
"In the name of my first ancestor, then," she continued, "where may yoube from?  You are like unto my people, and yet so unlike.  You speak mylanguage, and yet I heard you tell Tars Tarkas that you had but learnedit recently.  All Barsoomians speak the same tongue from the ice-cladsouth to the ice-clad north, though their written languages differ.Only in the valley Dor, where the river Iss empties into the lost seaof Korus, is there supposed to be a different language spoken, and,except in the legends of our ancestors, there is no record of aBarsoomian returning up the river Iss, from the shores of Korus in thevalley of Dor.  Do not tell me that you have thus returned!  They wouldkill you horribly anywhere upon the surface of Barsoom if that weretrue; tell me it is not!"
Her eyes were filled with a strange, weird light; her voice waspleading, and her little hands, reached up upon my breast, were pressedagainst me as though to wring a denial from my very heart.
"I do not know your customs, Dejah Thoris, but in my own Virginia agentleman does not lie to save himself; I am not of Dor; I have neverseen the mysterious Iss; the lost sea of Korus is still lost, so far asI am concerned.  Do you believe me?"
And then it struck me suddenly that I was very anxious that she shouldbelieve me.  It was not that I feared the results which would follow ageneral belief that I had returned from the Barsoomian heaven or hell,or whatever it was.  Why was it, then!  Why should I care what shethought?  I looked down at her; her beautiful face upturned, and herwonderful eyes opening up the very depth of her soul; and as my eyesmet hers I knew why, and--I shuddered.
A similar wave of feeling seemed to stir her; she drew away from mewith a sigh, and with her earnest, beautiful face turned up to mine,she whispered: "I believe you, John Carter; I do not know what a'gentleman' is, nor have I ever heard before of Virginia; but onBarsoom no man lies; if he does not wish to speak the truth he issilent.  Where is this Virginia, your country, John Carter?" she asked,and it seemed that this fair name of my fair land had never soundedmore beautiful than as it fell from those perfect lips on that far-goneday.
"I am of another world," I answered, "the great planet Earth, whichrevolves about our common sun and next within the orbit of yourBarsoom, which we know as Mars.  How I came here I cannot tell you, forI do not know; but here I am, and since my presence has permitted me toserve Dejah Thoris I am glad that I am here."
She gazed at me with troubled eyes, long and questioningly.  That itwas difficult to believe my statement I well knew, nor could I hopethat she would do so however much I craved her confidence and respect.I would much rather not have told her anything of my antecedents, butno man could look into the depth of those eyes and refuse her slightestbehest.
Finally she smiled, and, rising, said: "I shall have to believe eventhough I cannot understand.  I can readily perceive that you are not ofthe Barsoom of today; you are like us, yet different--but why should Itrouble my poor head with such a problem, when my heart tells me that Ibelieve because I wish to believe!"
It was good logic, good, earthly, feminine logic, and if it satisfiedher I certainly could pick no flaws in it.  As a matter of fact it wasabout the only kind of logic that could be brought to bear upon myproblem.  We fell into a general conversation then, asking andanswering many questions on each side.  She was curious to learn of thecustoms of my people and displayed a remarkable knowledge of events onEarth.  When I questioned her closely on this seeming familiarity withearthly things she laughed, and cried out:
"Why, every school boy on Barsoom knows the geography, and muchconcerning the fauna and flora, as well as the history of your planetfully as well as of his own.  Can we not see everything which takesplace upon Earth, as you call it; is it not hanging there in theheavens in plain sight?"
This baffled me, I must confess, fully as much as my statements hadconfounded her; and I told her so.  She then explained in general theinstruments her people had used and been perfecting for ages, whichpermit them to throw upon a screen a perfect image of what istranspiring upon any planet and upon many of the stars.  These picturesare so perfect in detail that, when photographed and enlarged, objectsno greater than a blade of grass may be distinctly recognized.  Iafterward, in Helium, saw many of these pictures, as well as theinstruments which produced them.
"If, then, you are so familiar with earthly things," I asked, "why isit that you do not recognize me as identical with the inhabitants ofthat planet?"
She smiled again as one might in bored indulgence of a questioningchild.
"Because, John Carter," she replied, "nearly every planet and starhaving atmospheric conditions at all approaching those of Barsoom,shows forms of animal life almost identical with you and me; and,further, Earth men, almost without exception, cover their bodies withstrange, unsightly pieces of cloth, and their heads with hideouscontraptions the purpose of which we have been unable to conceive;while you, when found by the Tharkian warriors, were entirelyundisfigured and unadorned.
"The fact that you wore no ornaments is a strong proof of yourun-Barsoomian origin, while the absence of grotesque coverings mightcause a doubt as to your earthliness."
I then narrated the details of my departure from the Earth, explainingthat my body there lay fully clothed in all the, to her, strangegarments of mundane dwellers.  At this point Sola returned with ourmeager belongings and her young Martian protege, who, of course, wouldhave to share the quarters with them.
Sola asked us if we had had a visitor during her absence, and seemedmuch surprised when we answered in the negative.  It seemed that as shehad mounted the approach to the upper floors where our quarters werelocated, she had met Sarkoja descending.  We decided that she must havebeen eavesdropping, but as we could recall nothing of importance thathad passed between us we dismissed the matter as of little consequence,merely promising ourselves to be warned to the utmost caution in thefuture.
Dejah Thoris and I then fell to examining the architecture anddecorations of the beautiful chambers of the building we wereoccupying.  She told me that these people had presumably flourishedover a hundred thousand years before.  They were the early progenitorsof her race, but had mixed with the other great race of early Martians,who were very dark, almost black, and also with the reddish yellow racewhich had flourished at the same time.
These three great divisions of the higher Martians had been forced intoa mighty alliance as the drying up of the Martian seas had compelledthem to seek the comparatively few and always diminishing fertileareas, and to defend themselves, under new conditions of life, againstthe wild hordes of green men.
Ages of close relationship and intermarrying had resulted in the raceof red men, of which Dejah Thoris was a fair and beautiful daughter.During the ages of hardships and incessant warring between their ownvarious races, as well as with the green men, and before they hadfitted themselves to the changed conditions, much of the highcivilization and many of the arts of the fair-haired Martians hadbecome lost; but the red race of today has reached a point where itfeels that it has made up in new discoveries and in a more practicalcivilization for all that lies irretrievably buried with the ancientBarsoomians, beneath the countless intervening ages.
These ancient Martians had been a highly cultivated and literary race,but during the vicissitudes of those trying centuries of readjustmentto new conditions, not only did their advancement and production ceaseentirely, but practically all their archives, records, and literaturewere lost.
Dejah Thoris related many interesting facts and legends concerning thislost race of noble and kindly people.  She said that the city in whichwe were camping was supposed to have been a center of commerce andculture known as Korad.  It had been built upon a beautiful, naturalharbor, landlocked by magnificent hills.  The little valley on the westfront of the city, she explained, was all that remained of the harbor,while the pass through the hills to the old sea bottom had been thechannel through which the shipping passed up to the city's gates.
The shores of the ancient seas were dotted with just such cities, andlesser ones, in diminishing numbers, were to be found converging towardthe center of the oceans, as the people had found it necessary tofollow the receding waters until necessity had forced upon them theirultimate salvation, the so-called Martian canals.
We had been so engrossed in exploration of the building and in ourconversation that it was late in the afternoon before we realized it.We were brought back to a realization of our present conditions by amessenger bearing a summons from Lorquas Ptomel directing me to appearbefore him forthwith.  Bidding Dejah Thoris and Sola farewell, andcommanding Woola to remain on guard, I hastened to the audiencechamber, where I found Lorquas Ptomel and Tars Tarkas seated upon therostrum.



CHAPTER XII
A PRISONER WITH POWER

As I entered and saluted, Lorquas Ptomel signaled me to advance, and,fixing his great, hideous eyes upon me, addressed me thus:
"You have been with us a few days, yet during that time you have byyour prowess won a high position among us.  Be that as it may, you arenot one of us; you owe us no allegiance.
"Your position is a peculiar one," he continued; "you are a prisonerand yet you give commands which must be obeyed; you are an alien andyet you are a Tharkian chieftain; you are a midget and yet you can killa mighty warrior with one blow of your fist.  And now you are reportedto have been plotting to escape with another prisoner of another race;a prisoner who, from her own admission, half believes you are returnedfrom the valley of Dor.  Either one of these accusations, if proved,would be sufficient grounds for your execution, but we are a justpeople and you shall have a trial on our return to Thark, if Tal Hajusso commands.
"But," he continued, in his fierce guttural tones, "if you run off withthe red girl it is I who shall have to account to Tal Hajus; it is Iwho shall have to face Tars Tarkas, and either demonstrate my right tocommand, or the metal from my dead carcass will go to a better man, forsuch is the custom of the Tharks.
"I have no quarrel with Tars Tarkas; together we rule supreme thegreatest of the lesser communities among the green men; we do not wishto fight between ourselves; and so if you were dead, John Carter, Ishould be glad.  Under two conditions only, however, may you be killedby us without orders from Tal Hajus; in personal combat inself-defense, should you attack one of us, or were you apprehended inan attempt to escape.
"As a matter of justice I must warn you that we only await one of thesetwo excuses for ridding ourselves of so great a responsibility.  Thesafe delivery of the red girl to Tal Hajus is of the greatestimportance.  Not in a thousand years have the Tharks made such acapture; she is the granddaughter of the greatest of the red jeddaks,who is also our bitterest enemy.  I have spoken.  The red girl told usthat we were without the softer sentiments of humanity, but we are ajust and truthful race.  You may go."
Turning, I left the audience chamber.  So this was the beginning ofSarkoja's persecution!  I knew that none other could be responsible forthis report which had reached the ears of Lorquas Ptomel so quickly,and now I recalled those portions of our conversation which had touchedupon escape and upon my origin.
Sarkoja was at this time Tars Tarkas' oldest and most trusted female.As such she was a mighty power behind the throne, for no warrior hadthe confidence of Lorquas Ptomel to such an extent as did his ablestlieutenant, Tars Tarkas.
However, instead of putting thoughts of possible escape from my mind,my audience with Lorquas Ptomel only served to center my every facultyon this subject.  Now, more than before, the absolute necessity forescape, in so far as Dejah Thoris was concerned, was impressed upon me,for I was convinced that some horrible fate awaited her at theheadquarters of Tal Hajus.
As described by Sola, this monster was the exaggerated personificationof all the ages of cruelty, ferocity, and brutality from which he haddescended.  Cold, cunning, calculating; he was, also, in markedcontrast to most of his fellows, a slave to that brute passion whichthe waning demands for procreation upon their dying planet has almoststilled in the Martian breast.
The thought that the divine Dejah Thoris might fall into the clutchesof such an abysmal atavism started the cold sweat upon me.  Far betterthat we save friendly bullets for ourselves at the last moment, as didthose brave frontier women of my lost land, who took their own livesrather than fall into the hands of the Indian braves.
As I wandered about the plaza lost in my gloomy forebodings Tars Tarkasapproached me on his way from the audience chamber.  His demeanortoward me was unchanged, and he greeted me as though we had not justparted a few moments before.
"Where are your quarters, John Carter?" he asked.
"I have selected none," I replied.  "It seemed best that I quarteredeither by myself or among the other warriors, and I was awaiting anopportunity to ask your advice.  As you know," and I smiled, "I am notyet familiar with all the customs of the Tharks."
"Come with me," he directed, and together we moved off across the plazato a building which I was glad to see adjoined that occupied by Solaand her charges.
"My quarters are on the first floor of this building," he said, "andthe second floor also is fully occupied by warriors, but the thirdfloor and the floors above are vacant; you may take your choice ofthese.
"I understand," he continued, "that you have given up your woman to thered prisoner.  Well, as you have said, your ways are not our ways, butyou can fight well enough to do about as you please, and so, if youwish to give your woman to a captive, it is your own affair; but as achieftain you should have those to serve you, and in accordance withour customs you may select any or all the females from the retinues ofthe chieftains whose metal you now wear."
I thanked him, but assured him that I could get along very nicelywithout assistance except in the matter of preparing food, and so hepromised to send women to me for this purpose and also for the care ofmy arms and the manufacture of my ammunition, which he said would benecessary.  I suggested that they might also bring some of the sleepingsilks and furs which belonged to me as spoils of combat, for the nightswere cold and I had none of my own.
He promised to do so, and departed.  Left alone, I ascended the windingcorridor to the upper floors in search of suitable quarters.  Thebeauties of the other buildings were repeated in this, and, as usual, Iwas soon lost in a tour of investigation and discovery.
I finally chose a front room on the third floor, because this broughtme nearer to Dejah Thoris, whose apartment was on the second floor ofthe adjoining building, and it flashed upon me that I could rig up somemeans of communication whereby she might signal me in case she neededeither my services or my protection.
Adjoining my sleeping apartment were baths, dressing rooms, and othersleeping and living apartments, in all some ten rooms on this floor.The windows of the back rooms overlooked an enormous court, whichformed the center of the square made by the buildings which faced thefour contiguous streets, and which was now given over to the quarteringof the various animals belonging to the warriors occupying theadjoining buildings.
While the court was entirely overgrown with the yellow, moss-likevegetation which blankets practically the entire surface of Mars, yetnumerous fountains, statuary, benches, and pergola-like contraptionsbore witness to the beauty which the court must have presented inbygone times, when graced by the fair-haired, laughing people whomstern and unalterable cosmic laws had driven not only from their homes,but from all except the vague legends of their descendants.
One could easily picture the gorgeous foliage of the luxuriant Martianvegetation which once filled this scene with life and color; thegraceful figures of the beautiful women, the straight and handsome men;the happy frolicking children--all sunlight, happiness and peace.  Itwas difficult to realize that they had gone; down through ages ofdarkness, cruelty, and ignorance, until their hereditary instincts ofculture and humanitarianism had risen ascendant once more in the finalcomposite race which now is dominant upon Mars.
My thoughts were cut short by the advent of several young femalesbearing loads of weapons, silks, furs, jewels, cooking utensils, andcasks of food and drink, including considerable loot from the aircraft.  All this, it seemed, had been the property of the twochieftains I had slain, and now, by the customs of the Tharks, it hadbecome mine.  At my direction they placed the stuff in one of the backrooms, and then departed, only to return with a second load, which theyadvised me constituted the balance of my goods.  On the second tripthey were accompanied by ten or fifteen other women and youths, who, itseemed, formed the retinues of the two chieftains.
They were not their families, nor their wives, nor their servants; therelationship was peculiar, and so unlike anything known to us that itis most difficult to describe.  All property among the green Martiansis owned in common by the community, except the personal weapons,ornaments and sleeping silks and furs of the individuals.  These alonecan one claim undisputed right to, nor may he accumulate more of thesethan are required for his actual needs.  The surplus he holds merely ascustodian, and it is passed on to the younger members of the communityas necessity demands.
The women and children of a man's retinue may be likened to a militaryunit for which he is responsible in various ways, as in matters ofinstruction, discipline, sustenance, and the exigencies of theircontinual roamings and their unending strife with other communities andwith the red Martians.  His women are in no sense wives.  The greenMartians use no word corresponding in meaning with this earthly word.Their mating is a matter of community interest solely, and is directedwithout reference to natural selection.  The council of chieftains ofeach community control the matter as surely as the owner of a Kentuckyracing stud directs the scientific breeding of his stock for theimprovement of the whole.
In theory it may sound well, as is often the case with theories, butthe results of ages of this unnatural practice, coupled with thecommunity interest in the offspring being held paramount to that of themother, is shown in the cold, cruel creatures, and their gloomy,loveless, mirthless existence.
It is true that the green Martians are absolutely virtuous, both menand women, with the exception of such degenerates as Tal Hajus; butbetter far a finer balance of human characteristics even at the expenseof a slight and occasional loss of chastity.
Finding that I must assume responsibility for these creatures, whetherI would or not, I made the best of it and directed them to findquarters on the upper floors, leaving the third floor to me.  One ofthe girls I charged with the duties of my simple cuisine, and directedthe others to take up the various activities which had formerlyconstituted their vocations.  Thereafter I saw little of them, nor didI care to.



CHAPTER XIII
LOVE-MAKING ON MARS

Following the battle with the air ships, the community remained withinthe city for several days, abandoning the homeward march until theycould feel reasonably assured that the ships would not return; for tobe caught on the open plains with a cavalcade of chariots and childrenwas far from the desire of even so warlike a people as the greenMartians.
During our period of inactivity, Tars Tarkas had instructed me in manyof the customs and arts of war familiar to the Tharks, includinglessons in riding and guiding the great beasts which bore the warriors.These creatures, which are known as thoats, are as dangerous andvicious as their masters, but when once subdued are sufficientlytractable for the purposes of the green Martians.
Two of these animals had fallen to me from the warriors whose metal Iwore, and in a short time I could handle them quite as well as thenative warriors.  The method was not at all complicated.  If the thoatsdid not respond with sufficient celerity to the telepathic instructionsof their riders they were dealt a terrific blow between the ears withthe butt of a pistol, and if they showed fight this treatment wascontinued until the brutes either were subdued, or had unseated theirriders.
In the latter case it became a life and death struggle between the manand the beast.  If the former were quick enough with his pistol hemight live to ride again, though upon some other beast; if not, historn and mangled body was gathered up by his women and burned inaccordance with Tharkian custom.
My experience with Woola determined me to attempt the experiment ofkindness in my treatment of my thoats.  First I taught them that theycould not unseat me, and even rapped them sharply between the ears toimpress upon them my authority and mastery.  Then, by degrees, I wontheir confidence in much the same manner as I had adopted countlesstimes with my many mundane mounts.  I was ever a good hand withanimals, and by inclination, as well as because it brought more lastingand satisfactory results, I was always kind and humane in my dealingswith the lower orders.  I could take a human life, if necessary, withfar less compunction than that of a poor, unreasoning, irresponsiblebrute.
In the course of a few days my thoats were the wonder of the entirecommunity.  They would follow me like dogs, rubbing their great snoutsagainst my body in awkward evidence of affection, and respond to myevery command with an alacrity and docility which caused the Martianwarriors to ascribe to me the possession of some earthly power unknownon Mars.
"How have you bewitched them?" asked Tars Tarkas one afternoon, when hehad seen me run my arm far between the great jaws of one of my thoatswhich had wedged a piece of stone between two of his teeth whilefeeding upon the moss-like vegetation within our court yard.
"By kindness," I replied.  "You see, Tars Tarkas, the softer sentimentshave their value, even to a warrior.  In the height of battle as wellas upon the march I know that my thoats will obey my every command, andtherefore my fighting efficiency is enhanced, and I am a better warriorfor the reason that I am a kind master.  Your other warriors would findit to the advantage of themselves as well as of the community to adoptmy methods in this respect.  Only a few days since you, yourself, toldme that these great brutes, by the uncertainty of their tempers, oftenwere the means of turning victory into defeat, since, at a crucialmoment, they might elect to unseat and rend their riders."
"Show me how you accomplish these results," was Tars Tarkas' onlyrejoinder.
And so I explained as carefully as I could the entire method oftraining I had adopted with my beasts, and later he had me repeat itbefore Lorquas Ptomel and the assembled warriors.  That moment markedthe beginning of a new existence for the poor thoats, and before I leftthe community of Lorquas Ptomel I had the satisfaction of observing aregiment of as tractable and docile mounts as one might care to see.The effect on the precision and celerity of the military movements wasso remarkable that Lorquas Ptomel presented me with a massive anklet ofgold from his own leg, as a sign of his appreciation of my service tothe horde.
On the seventh day following the battle with the air craft we againtook up the march toward Thark, all probability of another attack beingdeemed remote by Lorquas Ptomel.
During the days just preceding our departure I had seen but little ofDejah Thoris, as I had been kept very busy by Tars Tarkas with mylessons in the art of Martian warfare, as well as in the training of mythoats.  The few times I had visited her quarters she had been absent,walking upon the streets with Sola, or investigating the buildings inthe near vicinity of the plaza.  I had warned them against venturingfar from the plaza for fear of the great white apes, whose ferocity Iwas only too well acquainted with.  However, since Woola accompaniedthem on all their excursions, and as Sola was well armed, there wascomparatively little cause for fear.
On the evening before our departure I saw them approaching along one ofthe great avenues which lead into the plaza from the east.  I advancedto meet them, and telling Sola that I would take the responsibility forDejah Thoris' safekeeping, I directed her to return to her quarters onsome trivial errand.  I liked and trusted Sola, but for some reason Idesired to be alone with Dejah Thoris, who represented to me all that Ihad left behind upon Earth in agreeable and congenial companionship.There seemed bonds of mutual interest between us as powerful as thoughwe had been born under the same roof rather than upon differentplanets, hurtling through space some forty-eight million miles apart.
That she shared my sentiments in this respect I was positive, for on myapproach the look of pitiful hopelessness left her sweet countenance tobe replaced by a smile of joyful welcome, as she placed her littleright hand upon my left shoulder in true red Martian salute.
"Sarkoja told Sola that you had become a true Thark," she said, "andthat I would now see no more of you than of any of the other warriors."
"Sarkoja is a liar of the first magnitude," I replied, "notwithstandingthe proud claim of the Tharks to absolute verity."
Dejah Thoris laughed.
"I knew that even though you became a member of the community you wouldnot cease to be my friend; 'A warrior may change his metal, but not hisheart,' as the saying is upon Barsoom."
"I think they have been trying to keep us apart," she continued, "forwhenever you have been off duty one of the older women of Tars Tarkas'retinue has always arranged to trump up some excuse to get Sola and meout of sight.  They have had me down in the pits below the buildingshelping them mix their awful radium powder, and make their terribleprojectiles.  You know that these have to be manufactured by artificiallight, as exposure to sunlight always results in an explosion.  Youhave noticed that their bullets explode when they strike an object?Well, the opaque, outer coating is broken by the impact, exposing aglass cylinder, almost solid, in the forward end of which is a minuteparticle of radium powder.  The moment the sunlight, even thoughdiffused, strikes this powder it explodes with a violence which nothingcan withstand.  If you ever witness a night battle you will note theabsence of these explosions, while the morning following the battlewill be filled at sunrise with the sharp detonations of explodingmissiles fired the preceding night.  As a rule, however, non-explodingprojectiles are used at night."  [I have used the word radium indescribing this powder because in the light of recent discoveries onEarth I believe it to be a mixture of which radium is the base.  InCaptain Carter's manuscript it is mentioned always by the name used inthe written language of Helium and is spelled in hieroglyphics which itwould be difficult and useless to reproduce.]
While I was much interested in Dejah Thoris' explanation of thiswonderful adjunct to Martian warfare, I was more concerned by theimmediate problem of their treatment of her.  That they were keepingher away from me was not a matter for surprise, but that they shouldsubject her to dangerous and arduous labor filled me with rage.
"Have they ever subjected you to cruelty and ignominy, Dejah Thoris?" Iasked, feeling the hot blood of my fighting ancestors leap in my veinsas I awaited her reply.
"Only in little ways, John Carter," she answered.  "Nothing that canharm me outside my pride.  They know that I am the daughter of tenthousand jeddaks, that I trace my ancestry straight back without abreak to the builder of the first great waterway, and they, who do noteven know their own mothers, are jealous of me.  At heart they hatetheir horrid fates, and so wreak their poor spite on me who stand foreverything they have not, and for all they most crave and never canattain.  Let us pity them, my chieftain, for even though we die attheir hands we can afford them pity, since we are greater than they andthey know it."
Had I known the significance of those words "my chieftain," as appliedby a red Martian woman to a man, I should have had the surprise of mylife, but I did not know at that time, nor for many months thereafter.Yes, I still had much to learn upon Barsoom.
"I presume it is the better part of wisdom that we bow to our fate withas good grace as possible, Dejah Thoris; but I hope, nevertheless, thatI may be present the next time that any Martian, green, red, pink, orviolet, has the temerity to even so much as frown on you, my princess."
Dejah Thoris caught her breath at my last words, and gazed upon me withdilated eyes and quickening breath, and then, with an odd little laugh,which brought roguish dimples to the corners of her mouth, she shookher head and cried:
"What a child!  A great warrior and yet a stumbling little child."
"What have I done now?" I asked, in sore perplexity.
"Some day you shall know, John Carter, if we live; but I may not tellyou.  And I, the daughter of Mors Kajak, son of Tardos Mors, havelistened without anger," she soliloquized in conclusion.
Then she broke out again into one of her gay, happy, laughing moods;joking with me on my prowess as a Thark warrior as contrasted with mysoft heart and natural kindliness.
"I presume that should you accidentally wound an enemy you would takehim home and nurse him back to health," she laughed.
"That is precisely what we do on Earth," I answered.  "At least amongcivilized men."
This made her laugh again.  She could not understand it, for, with allher tenderness and womanly sweetness, she was still a Martian, and to aMartian the only good enemy is a dead enemy; for every dead foemanmeans so much more to divide between those who live.
I was very curious to know what I had said or done to cause her so muchperturbation a moment before and so I continued to importune her toenlighten me.
"No," she exclaimed, "it is enough that you have said it and that Ihave listened.  And when you learn, John Carter, and if I be dead, aslikely I shall be ere the further moon has circled Barsoom anothertwelve times, remember that I listened and that I--smiled."
It was all Greek to me, but the more I begged her to explain the morepositive became her denials of my request, and, so, in veryhopelessness, I desisted.
Day had now given away to night and as we wandered along the greatavenue lighted by the two moons of Barsoom, and with Earth looking downupon us out of her luminous green eye, it seemed that we were alone inthe universe, and I, at least, was content that it should be so.
The chill of the Martian night was upon us, and removing my silks Ithrew them across the shoulders of Dejah Thoris.  As my arm rested foran instant upon her I felt a thrill pass through every fiber of mybeing such as contact with no other mortal had even produced; and itseemed to me that she had leaned slightly toward me, but of that I wasnot sure.  Only I knew that as my arm rested there across her shoulderslonger than the act of adjusting the silk required she did not drawaway, nor did she speak.  And so, in silence, we walked the surface ofa dying world, but in the breast of one of us at least had been bornthat which is ever oldest, yet ever new.
I loved Dejah Thoris.  The touch of my arm upon her naked shoulder hadspoken to me in words I would not mistake, and I knew that I had lovedher since the first moment that my eyes had met hers that first time inthe plaza of the dead city of Korad.



CHAPTER XIV
A DUEL TO THE DEATH

My first impulse was to tell her of my love, and then I thought of thehelplessness of her position wherein I alone could lighten the burdensof her captivity, and protect her in my poor way against the thousandsof hereditary enemies she must face upon our arrival at Thark.  I couldnot chance causing her additional pain or sorrow by declaring a lovewhich, in all probability she did not return.  Should I be soindiscreet, her position would be even more unbearable than now, andthe thought that she might feel that I was taking advantage of herhelplessness, to influence her decision was the final argument whichsealed my lips.
"Why are you so quiet, Dejah Thoris?" I asked.  "Possibly you wouldrather return to Sola and your quarters."
"No," she murmured, "I am happy here.  I do not know why it is that Ishould always be happy and contented when you, John Carter, a stranger,are with me; yet at such times it seems that I am safe and that, withyou, I shall soon return to my father's court and feel his strong armsabout me and my mother's tears and kisses on my cheek."
"Do people kiss, then, upon Barsoom?" I asked, when she had explainedthe word she used, in answer to my inquiry as to its meaning.
"Parents, brothers, and sisters, yes; and," she added in a low,thoughtful tone, "lovers."
"And you, Dejah Thoris, have parents and brothers and sisters?"
"Yes."
"And a--lover?"
She was silent, nor could I venture to repeat the question.
"The man of Barsoom," she finally ventured, "does not ask personalquestions of women, except his mother, and the woman he has fought forand won."
"But I have fought--" I started, and then I wished my tongue had beencut from my mouth; for she turned even as I caught myself and ceased,and drawing my silks from her shoulder she held them out to me, andwithout a word, and with head held high, she moved with the carriage ofthe queen she was toward the plaza and the doorway of her quarters.
I did not attempt to follow her, other than to see that she reached thebuilding in safety, but, directing Woola to accompany her, I turneddisconsolately and entered my own house.  I sat for hours cross-legged,and cross-tempered, upon my silks meditating upon the queer freakschance plays upon us poor devils of mortals.
So this was love!  I had escaped it for all the years I had roamed thefive continents and their encircling seas; in spite of beautiful womenand urging opportunity; in spite of a half-desire for love and aconstant search for my ideal, it had remained for me to fall furiouslyand hopelessly in love with a creature from another world, of a speciessimilar possibly, yet not identical with mine.  A woman who was hatchedfrom an egg, and whose span of life might cover a thousand years; whosepeople had strange customs and ideas; a woman whose hopes, whosepleasures, whose standards of virtue and of right and wrong might varyas greatly from mine as did those of the green Martians.
Yes, I was a fool, but I was in love, and though I was suffering thegreatest misery I had ever known I would not have had it otherwise forall the riches of Barsoom.  Such is love, and such are lovers whereverlove is known.
To me, Dejah Thoris was all that was perfect; all that was virtuous andbeautiful and noble and good.  I believed that from the bottom of myheart, from the depth of my soul on that night in Korad as I satcross-legged upon my silks while the nearer moon of Barsoom racedthrough the western sky toward the horizon, and lighted up the gold andmarble, and jeweled mosaics of my world-old chamber, and I believe ittoday as I sit at my desk in the little study overlooking the Hudson.Twenty years have intervened; for ten of them I lived and fought forDejah Thoris and her people, and for ten I have lived upon her memory.
The morning of our departure for Thark dawned clear and hot, as do allMartian mornings except for the six weeks when the snow melts at thepoles.
I sought out Dejah Thoris in the throng of departing chariots, but sheturned her shoulder to me, and I could see the red blood mount to hercheek.  With the foolish inconsistency of love I held my peace when Imight have plead ignorance of the nature of my offense, or at least thegravity of it, and so have effected, at worst, a half conciliation.
[Illustration: I sought out Dejah Thoris in the throng of departingchariots.]
My duty dictated that I must see that she was comfortable, and so Iglanced into her chariot and rearranged her silks and furs.  In doingso I noted with horror that she was heavily chained by one ankle to theside of the vehicle.
"What does this mean?" I cried, turning to Sola.
"Sarkoja thought it best," she answered, her face betokening herdisapproval of the procedure.
Examining the manacles I saw that they fastened with a massive springlock.
"Where is the key, Sola?  Let me have it."
"Sarkoja wears it, John Carter," she answered.
I turned without further word and sought out Tars Tarkas, to whom Ivehemently objected to the unnecessary humiliations and cruelties, asthey seemed to my lover's eyes, that were being heaped upon DejahThoris.
"John Carter," he answered, "if ever you and Dejah Thoris escape theTharks it will be upon this journey.  We know that you will not gowithout her.  You have shown yourself a mighty fighter, and we do notwish to manacle you, so we hold you both in the easiest way that willyet ensure security.  I have spoken."
I saw the strength of his reasoning at a flash, and knew that it werefutile to appeal from his decision, but I asked that the key be takenfrom Sarkoja and that she be directed to leave the prisoner alone infuture.
"This much, Tars Tarkas, you may do for me in return for the friendshipthat, I must confess, I feel for you."
"Friendship?" he replied.  "There is no such thing, John Carter; buthave your will.  I shall direct that Sarkoja cease to annoy the girl,and I myself will take the custody of the key."
"Unless you wish me to assume the responsibility," I said, smiling.
He looked at me long and earnestly before he spoke.
"Were you to give me your word that neither you nor Dejah Thoris wouldattempt to escape until after we have safely reached the court of TalHajus you might have the key and throw the chains into the river Iss."
"It were better that you held the key, Tars Tarkas," I replied
He smiled, and said no more, but that night as we were making camp Isaw him unfasten Dejah Thoris' fetters himself.
With all his cruel ferocity and coldness there was an undercurrent ofsomething in Tars Tarkas which he seemed ever battling to subdue.Could it be a vestige of some human instinct come back from an ancientforbear to haunt him with the horror of his people's ways!
As I was approaching Dejah Thoris' chariot I passed Sarkoja, and theblack, venomous look she accorded me was the sweetest balm I had feltfor many hours.  Lord, how she hated me!  It bristled from her sopalpably that one might almost have cut it with a sword.
A few moments later I saw her deep in conversation with a warrior namedZad; a big, hulking, powerful brute, but one who had never made a killamong his own chieftains, and a second name only with the metal of somechieftain.  It was this custom which entitled me to the names of eitherof the chieftains I had killed; in fact, some of the warriors addressedme as Dotar Sojat, a combination of the surnames of the two warriorchieftains whose metal I had taken, or, in other words, whom I hadslain in fair fight.
As Sarkoja talked with Zad he cast occasional glances in my direction,while she seemed to be urging him very strongly to some action.  I paidlittle attention to it at the time, but the next day I had good reasonto recall the circumstances, and at the same time gain a slight insightinto the depths of Sarkoja's hatred and the lengths to which she wascapable of going to wreak her horrid vengeance on me.
Dejah Thoris would have none of me again on this evening, and though Ispoke her name she neither replied, nor conceded by so much as theflutter of an eyelid that she realized my existence.  In my extremity Idid what most other lovers would have done; I sought word from herthrough an intimate.  In this instance it was Sola whom I interceptedin another part of camp.
"What is the matter with Dejah Thoris?" I blurted out at her.  "Whywill she not speak to me?"
Sola seemed puzzled herself, as though such strange actions on the partof two humans were quite beyond her, as indeed they were, poor child.
"She says you have angered her, and that is all she will say, exceptthat she is the daughter of a jed and the granddaughter of a jeddak andshe has been humiliated by a creature who could not polish the teeth ofher grandmother's sorak."
I pondered over this report for some time, finally asking, "What mighta sorak be, Sola?"
"A little animal about as big as my hand, which the red Martian womenkeep to play with," explained Sola.
Not fit to polish the teeth of her grandmother's cat!  I must rankpretty low in the consideration of Dejah Thoris, I thought; but I couldnot help laughing at the strange figure of speech, so homely and inthis respect so earthly.  It made me homesick, for it sounded very muchlike "not fit to polish her shoes."  And then commenced a train ofthought quite new to me.  I began to wonder what my people at home weredoing.  I had not seen them for years.  There was a family of Cartersin Virginia who claimed close relationship with me; I was supposed tobe a great uncle, or something of the kind equally foolish.  I couldpass anywhere for twenty-five to thirty years of age, and to be a greatuncle always seemed the height of incongruity, for my thoughts andfeelings were those of a boy.  There was two little kiddies in theCarter family whom I had loved and who had thought there was no one onEarth like Uncle Jack; I could see them just as plainly, as I stoodthere under the moonlit skies of Barsoom, and I longed for them as Ihad never longed for any mortals before.  By nature a wanderer, I hadnever known the true meaning of the word home, but the great hall ofthe Carters had always stood for all that the word did mean to me, andnow my heart turned toward it from the cold and unfriendly peoples Ihad been thrown amongst.  For did not even Dejah Thoris despise me!  Iwas a low creature, so low in fact that I was not even fit to polishthe teeth of her grandmother's cat; and then my saving sense of humorcame to my rescue, and laughing I turned into my silks and furs andslept upon the moon-haunted ground the sleep of a tired and healthyfighting man.
We broke camp the next day at an early hour and marched with only asingle halt until just before dark.  Two incidents broke thetediousness of the march.  About noon we espied far to our right whatwas evidently an incubator, and Lorquas Ptomel directed Tars Tarkas toinvestigate it.  The latter took a dozen warriors, including myself,and we raced across the velvety carpeting of moss to the littleenclosure.
It was indeed an incubator, but the eggs were very small in comparisonwith those I had seen hatching in ours at the time of my arrival onMars.
Tars Tarkas dismounted and examined the enclosure minutely, finallyannouncing that it belonged to the green men of Warhoon and that thecement was scarcely dry where it had been walled up.
"They cannot be a day's march ahead of us," he exclaimed, the light ofbattle leaping to his fierce face.
The work at the incubator was short indeed.  The warriors tore open theentrance and a couple of them, crawling in, soon demolished all theeggs with their short-swords.  Then remounting we dashed back to jointhe cavalcade.  During the ride I took occasion to ask Tars Tarkas ifthese Warhoons whose eggs we had destroyed were a smaller people thanhis Tharks.
"I noticed that their eggs were so much smaller than those I sawhatching in your incubator," I added.
He explained that the eggs had just been placed there; but, like allgreen Martian eggs, they would grow during the five-year period ofincubation until they obtained the size of those I had seen hatching onthe day of my arrival on Barsoom.  This was indeed an interesting pieceof information, for it had always seemed remarkable to me that thegreen Martian women, large as they were, could bring forth suchenormous eggs as I had seen the four-foot infants emerging from.  As amatter of fact, the new-laid egg is but little larger than an ordinarygoose egg, and as it does not commence to grow until subjected to thelight of the sun the chieftains have little difficulty in transportingseveral hundreds of them at one time from the storage vaults to theincubators.
Shortly after the incident of the Warhoon eggs we halted to rest theanimals, and it was during this halt that the second of the day'sinteresting episodes occurred.  I was engaged in changing my ridingcloths from one of my thoats to the other, for I divided the day's workbetween them, when Zad approached me, and without a word struck myanimal a terrific blow with his long-sword.
I did not need a manual of green Martian etiquette to know what replyto make, for, in fact, I was so wild with anger that I could scarcelyrefrain from drawing my pistol and shooting him down for the brute hewas; but he stood waiting with drawn long-sword, and my only choice wasto draw my own and meet him in fair fight with his choice of weapons ora lesser one.
This latter alternative is always permissible, therefore I could haveused my short-sword, my dagger, my hatchet, or my fists had I wished,and been entirely within my rights, but I could not use firearms or aspear while he held only his long-sword.
I chose the same weapon he had drawn because I knew he prided himselfupon his ability with it, and I wished, if I worsted him at all, to doit with his own weapon.  The fight that followed was a long one anddelayed the resumption of the march for an hour.  The entire communitysurrounded us, leaving a clear space about one hundred feet in diameterfor our battle.
Zad first attempted to rush me down as a bull might a wolf, but I wasmuch too quick for him, and each time I side-stepped his rushes hewould go lunging past me, only to receive a nick from my sword upon hisarm or back.  He was soon streaming blood from a half dozen minorwounds, but I could not obtain an opening to deliver an effectivethrust.  Then he changed his tactics, and fighting warily and withextreme dexterity, he tried to do by science what he was unable to doby brute strength.  I must admit that he was a magnificent swordsman,and had it not been for my greater endurance and the remarkable agilitythe lesser gravitation of Mars lent me I might not have been able toput up the creditable fight I did against him.
We circled for some time without doing much damage on either side; thelong, straight, needle-like swords flashing in the sunlight, andringing out upon the stillness as they crashed together with eacheffective parry.  Finally Zad, realizing that he was tiring more thanI, evidently decided to close in and end the battle in a final blaze ofglory for himself; just as he rushed me a blinding flash of lightstruck full in my eyes, so that I could not see his approach and couldonly leap blindly to one side in an effort to escape the mighty bladethat it seemed I could already feel in my vitals.  I was only partiallysuccessful, as a sharp pain in my left shoulder attested, but in thesweep of my glance as I sought to again locate my adversary, a sightmet my astonished gaze which paid me well for the wound the temporaryblindness had caused me.  There, upon Dejah Thoris' chariot stood threefigures, for the purpose evidently of witnessing the encounter abovethe heads of the intervening Tharks.  There were Dejah Thoris, Sola,and Sarkoja, and as my fleeting glance swept over them a little tableauwas presented which will stand graven in my memory to the day of mydeath.
As I looked, Dejah Thoris turned upon Sarkoja with the fury of a youngtigress and struck something from her upraised hand; something whichflashed in the sunlight as it spun to the ground.  Then I knew what hadblinded me at that crucial moment of the fight, and how Sarkoja hadfound a way to kill me without herself delivering the final thrust.Another thing I saw, too, which almost lost my life for me then andthere, for it took my mind for the fraction of an instant entirely frommy antagonist; for, as Dejah Thoris struck the tiny mirror from herhand, Sarkoja, her face livid with hatred and baffled rage, whipped outher dagger and aimed a terrific blow at Dejah Thoris; and then Sola,our dear and faithful Sola, sprang between them; the last I saw was thegreat knife descending upon her shielding breast.
My enemy had recovered from his thrust and was making it extremelyinteresting for me, so I reluctantly gave my attention to the work inhand, but my mind was not upon the battle.
We rushed each other furiously time after time, 'til suddenly, feelingthe sharp point of his sword at my breast in a thrust I could neitherparry nor escape, I threw myself upon him with outstretched sword andwith all the weight of my body, determined that I would not die aloneif I could prevent it.  I felt the steel tear into my chest, all wentblack before me, my head whirled in dizziness, and I felt my kneesgiving beneath me.



CHAPTER XV
SOLA TELLS ME HER STORY

When consciousness returned, and, as I soon learned, I was down but amoment, I sprang quickly to my feet searching for my sword, and there Ifound it, buried to the hilt in the green breast of Zad, who lay stonedead upon the ochre moss of the ancient sea bottom.  As I regained myfull senses I found his weapon piercing my left breast, but onlythrough the flesh and muscles which cover my ribs, entering near thecenter of my chest and coming out below the shoulder.  As I had lungedI had turned so that his sword merely passed beneath the muscles,inflicting a painful but not dangerous wound.
Removing the blade from my body I also regained my own, and turning myback upon his ugly carcass, I moved, sick, sore, and disgusted, towardthe chariots which bore my retinue and my belongings.  A murmur ofMartian applause greeted me, but I cared not for it.
Bleeding and weak I reached my women, who, accustomed to suchhappenings, dressed my wounds, applying the wonderful healing andremedial agents which make only the most instantaneous of death blowsfatal.  Give a Martian woman a chance and death must take a back seat.They soon had me patched up so that, except for weakness from loss ofblood and a little soreness around the wound, I suffered no greatdistress from this thrust which, under earthly treatment, undoubtedlywould have put me flat on my back for days.
As soon as they were through with me I hastened to the chariot of DejahThoris, where I found my poor Sola with her chest swathed in bandages,but apparently little the worse for her encounter with Sarkoja, whosedagger it seemed had struck the edge of one of Sola's metal breastornaments and, thus deflected, had inflicted but a slight flesh wound.
As I approached I found Dejah Thoris lying prone upon her silks andfurs, her lithe form wracked with sobs.  She did not notice mypresence, nor did she hear me speaking with Sola, who was standing ashort distance from the vehicle.
"Is she injured?" I asked of Sola, indicating Dejah Thoris by aninclination of my head.
"No," she answered, "she thinks that you are dead."
"And that her grandmother's cat may now have no one to polish itsteeth?" I queried, smiling.
"I think you wrong her, John Carter," said Sola.  "I do not understandeither her ways or yours, but I am sure the granddaughter of tenthousand jeddaks would never grieve like this over any who held but thehighest claim upon her affections.  They are a proud race, but they arejust, as are all Barsoomians, and you must have hurt or wronged hergrievously that she will not admit your existence living, though shemourns you dead.
"Tears are a strange sight upon Barsoom," she continued, "and so it isdifficult for me to interpret them.  I have seen but two people weep inall my life, other than Dejah Thoris; one wept from sorrow, the otherfrom baffled rage.  The first was my mother, years ago before theykilled her; the other was Sarkoja, when they dragged her from me today."
"Your mother!" I exclaimed, "but, Sola, you could not have known yourmother, child."
"But I did.  And my father also," she added.  "If you would like tohear the strange and un-Barsoomian story come to the chariot tonight,John Carter, and I will tell you that of which I have never spoken inall my life before.  And now the signal has been given to resume themarch, you must go."
"I will come tonight, Sola," I promised.  "Be sure to tell Dejah ThorisI am alive and well.  I shall not force myself upon her, and be surethat you do not let her know I saw her tears.  If she would speak withme I but await her command."
Sola mounted the chariot, which was swinging into its place in line,and I hastened to my waiting thoat and galloped to my station besideTars Tarkas at the rear of the column.
We made a most imposing and awe-inspiring spectacle as we strung outacross the yellow landscape; the two hundred and fifty ornate andbrightly colored chariots, preceded by an advance guard of some twohundred mounted warriors and chieftains riding five abreast and onehundred yards apart, and followed by a like number in the sameformation, with a score or more of flankers on either side; the fiftyextra mastodons, or heavy draught animals, known as zitidars, and thefive or six hundred extra thoats of the warriors running loose withinthe hollow square formed by the surrounding warriors.  The gleamingmetal and jewels of the gorgeous ornaments of the men and women,duplicated in the trappings of the zitidars and thoats, andinterspersed with the flashing colors of magnificent silks and furs andfeathers, lent a barbaric splendor to the caravan which would haveturned an East Indian potentate green with envy.
The enormous broad tires of the chariots and the padded feet of theanimals brought forth no sound from the moss-covered sea bottom; and sowe moved in utter silence, like some huge phantasmagoria, except whenthe stillness was broken by the guttural growling of a goaded zitidar,or the squealing of fighting thoats.  The green Martians converse butlittle, and then usually in monosyllables, low and like the faintrumbling of distant thunder.
We traversed a trackless waste of moss which, bending to the pressureof broad tire or padded foot, rose up again behind us, leaving no signthat we had passed.  We might indeed have been the wraiths of thedeparted dead upon the dead sea of that dying planet for all the soundor sign we made in passing.  It was the first march of a large body ofmen and animals I had ever witnessed which raised no dust and left nospoor; for there is no dust upon Mars except in the cultivateddistricts during the winter months, and even then the absence of highwinds renders it almost unnoticeable.
We camped that night at the foot of the hills we had been approachingfor two days and which marked the southern boundary of this particularsea.  Our animals had been two days without drink, nor had they hadwater for nearly two months, not since shortly after leaving Thark;but, as Tars Tarkas explained to me, they require but little and canlive almost indefinitely upon the moss which covers Barsoom, and which,he told me, holds in its tiny stems sufficient moisture to meet thelimited demands of the animals.
After partaking of my evening meal of cheese-like food and vegetablemilk I sought out Sola, whom I found working by the light of a torchupon some of Tars Tarkas' trappings.  She looked up at my approach, herface lighting with pleasure and with welcome.
"I am glad you came," she said; "Dejah Thoris sleeps and I am lonely.Mine own people do not care for me, John Carter; I am too unlike them.It is a sad fate, since I must live my life amongst them, and I oftenwish that I were a true green Martian woman, without love and withouthope; but I have known love and so I am lost.
"I promised to tell you my story, or rather the story of my parents.From what I have learned of you and the ways of your people I am surethat the tale will not seem strange to you, but among green Martians ithas no parallel within the memory of the oldest living Thark, nor doour legends hold many similar tales.
"My mother was rather small, in fact too small to be allowed theresponsibilities of maternity, as our chieftains breed principally forsize.  She was also less cold and cruel than most green Martian women,and caring little for their society, she often roamed the desertedavenues of Thark alone, or went and sat among the wild flowers thatdeck the nearby hills, thinking thoughts and wishing wishes which Ibelieve I alone among Tharkian women today may understand, for am I notthe child of my mother?
"And there among the hills she met a young warrior, whose duty it wasto guard the feeding zitidars and thoats and see that they roamed notbeyond the hills.  They spoke at first only of such things as interesta community of Tharks, but gradually, as they came to meet more often,and, as was now quite evident to both, no longer by chance, they talkedabout themselves, their likes, their ambitions and their hopes.  Shetrusted him and told him of the awful repugnance she felt for thecruelties of their kind, for the hideous, loveless lives they must everlead, and then she waited for the storm of denunciation to break fromhis cold, hard lips; but instead he took her in his arms and kissed her.
"They kept their love a secret for six long years.  She, my mother, wasof the retinue of the great Tal Hajus, while her lover was a simplewarrior, wearing only his own metal.  Had their defection from thetraditions of the Tharks been discovered both would have paid thepenalty in the great arena before Tal Hajus and the assembled hordes.
"The egg from which I came was hidden beneath a great glass vessel uponthe highest and most inaccessible of the partially ruined towers ofancient Thark.  Once each year my mother visited it for the five longyears it lay there in the process of incubation.  She dared not comeoftener, for in the mighty guilt of her conscience she feared that herevery move was watched.  During this period my father gained greatdistinction as a warrior and had taken the metal from severalchieftains.  His love for my mother had never diminished, and his ownambition in life was to reach a point where he might wrest the metalfrom Tal Hajus himself, and thus, as ruler of the Tharks, be free toclaim her as his own, as well as, by the might of his power, protectthe child which otherwise would be quickly dispatched should the truthbecome known.
"It was a wild dream, that of wresting the metal from Tal Hajus in fiveshort years, but his advance was rapid, and he soon stood high in thecouncils of Thark.  But one day the chance was lost forever, in so faras it could come in time to save his loved ones, for he was orderedaway upon a long expedition to the ice-clad south, to make war upon thenatives there and despoil them of their furs, for such is the manner ofthe green Barsoomian; he does not labor for what he can wrest in battlefrom others.
"He was gone for four years, and when he returned all had been over forthree; for about a year after his departure, and shortly before thetime for the return of an expedition which had gone forth to fetch thefruits of a community incubator, the egg had hatched.  Thereafter mymother continued to keep me in the old tower, visiting me nightly andlavishing upon me the love the community life would have robbed us bothof.  She hoped, upon the return of the expedition from the incubator,to mix me with the other young assigned to the quarters of Tal Hajus,and thus escape the fate which would surely follow discovery of her sinagainst the ancient traditions of the green men.
"She taught me rapidly the language and customs of my kind, and onenight she told me the story I have told to you up to this point,impressing upon me the necessity for absolute secrecy and the greatcaution I must exercise after she had placed me with the other youngTharks to permit no one to guess that I was further advanced ineducation than they, nor by any sign to divulge in the presence ofothers my affection for her, or my knowledge of my parentage; and thendrawing me close to her she whispered in my ear the name of my father.
"And then a light flashed out upon the darkness of the tower chamber,and there stood Sarkoja, her gleaming, baleful eyes fixed in a frenzyof loathing and contempt upon my mother.  The torrent of hatred andabuse she poured out upon her turned my young heart cold in terror.That she had heard the entire story was apparent, and that she hadsuspected something wrong from my mother's long nightly absences fromher quarters accounted for her presence there on that fateful night.
"One thing she had not heard, nor did she know, the whispered name ofmy father.  This was apparent from her repeated demands upon my motherto disclose the name of her partner in sin, but no amount of abuse orthreats could wring this from her, and to save me from needless tortureshe lied, for she told Sarkoja that she alone knew nor would she eventell her child.
"With final imprecations, Sarkoja hastened away to Tal Hajus to reporther discovery, and while she was gone my mother, wrapping me in thesilks and furs of her night coverings, so that I was scarcelynoticeable, descended to the streets and ran wildly away toward theoutskirts of the city, in the direction which led to the far south, outtoward the man whose protection she might not claim, but on whose faceshe wished to look once more before she died.
"As we neared the city's southern extremity a sound came to us fromacross the mossy flat, from the direction of the only pass through thehills which led to the gates, the pass by which caravans from eithernorth or south or east or west would enter the city.  The sounds weheard were the squealing of thoats and the grumbling of zitidars, withthe occasional clank of arms which announced the approach of a body ofwarriors.  The thought uppermost in her mind was that it was my fatherreturned from his expedition, but the cunning of the Thark held herfrom headlong and precipitate flight to greet him.
"Retreating into the shadows of a doorway she awaited the coming of thecavalcade which shortly entered the avenue, breaking its formation andthronging the thoroughfare from wall to wall.  As the head of theprocession passed us the lesser moon swung clear of the overhangingroofs and lit up the scene with all the brilliancy of her wondrouslight.  My mother shrank further back into the friendly shadows, andfrom her hiding place saw that the expedition was not that of myfather, but the returning caravan bearing the young Tharks.  Instantlyher plan was formed, and as a great chariot swung close to our hidingplace she slipped stealthily in upon the trailing tailboard, crouchinglow in the shadow of the high side, straining me to her bosom in afrenzy of love.
"She knew, what I did not, that never again after that night would shehold me to her breast, nor was it likely we would ever look upon eachother's face again.  In the confusion of the plaza she mixed me withthe other children, whose guardians during the journey were now free torelinquish their responsibility.  We were herded together into a greatroom, fed by women who had not accompanied the expedition, and the nextday we were parceled out among the retinues of the chieftains.
"I never saw my mother after that night.  She was imprisoned by TalHajus, and every effort, including the most horrible and shamefultorture, was brought to bear upon her to wring from her lips the nameof my father; but she remained steadfast and loyal, dying at lastamidst the laughter of Tal Hajus and his chieftains during some awfultorture she was undergoing.
"I learned afterwards that she told them that she had killed me to saveme from a like fate at their hands, and that she had thrown my body tothe white apes.  Sarkoja alone disbelieved her, and I feel to this daythat she suspects my true origin, but does not dare expose me, at thepresent, at all events, because she also guesses, I am sure, theidentity of my father.
"When he returned from his expedition and learned the story of mymother's fate I was present as Tal Hajus told him; but never by thequiver of a muscle did he betray the slightest emotion; only he did notlaugh as Tal Hajus gleefully described her death struggles.  From thatmoment on he was the cruelest of the cruel, and I am awaiting the daywhen he shall win the goal of his ambition, and feel the carcass of TalHajus beneath his foot, for I am as sure that he but waits theopportunity to wreak a terrible vengeance, and that his great love isas strong in his breast as when it first transfigured him nearly fortyyears ago, as I am that we sit here upon the edge of a world-old oceanwhile sensible people sleep, John Carter."
"And your father, Sola, is he with us now?" I asked.
"Yes," she replied, "but he does not know me for what I am, nor does heknow who betrayed my mother to Tal Hajus.  I alone know my father'sname, and only I and Tal Hajus and Sarkoja know that it was she whocarried the tale that brought death and torture upon her he loved."
We sat silent for a few moments, she wrapped in the gloomy thoughts ofher terrible past, and I in pity for the poor creatures whom theheartless, senseless customs of their race had doomed to loveless livesof cruelty and of hate.  Presently she spoke.
"John Carter, if ever a real man walked the cold, dead bosom of Barsoomyou are one.  I know that I can trust you, and because the knowledgemay someday help you or him or Dejah Thoris or myself, I am going totell you the name of my father, nor place any restrictions orconditions upon your tongue.  When the time comes, speak the truth ifit seems best to you.  I trust you because I know that you are notcursed with the terrible trait of absolute and unswerving truthfulness,that you could lie like one of your own Virginia gentlemen if a liewould save others from sorrow or suffering.  My father's name is TarsTarkas."



CHAPTER XVI
WE PLAN ESCAPE

The remainder of our journey to Thark was uneventful.  We were twentydays upon the road, crossing two sea bottoms and passing through oraround a number of ruined cities, mostly smaller than Korad.  Twice wecrossed the famous Martian waterways, or canals, so-called by ourearthly astronomers.  When we approached these points a warrior wouldbe sent far ahead with a powerful field glass, and if no great body ofred Martian troops was in sight we would advance as close as possiblewithout chance of being seen and then camp until dark, when we wouldslowly approach the cultivated tract, and, locating one of thenumerous, broad highways which cross these areas at regular intervals,creep silently and stealthily across to the arid lands upon the otherside.  It required five hours to make one of these crossings without asingle halt, and the other consumed the entire night, so that we werejust leaving the confines of the high-walled fields when the sun brokeout upon us.
Crossing in the darkness, as we did, I was unable to see but little,except as the nearer moon, in her wild and ceaseless hurtling throughthe Barsoomian heavens, lit up little patches of the landscape fromtime to time, disclosing walled fields and low, rambling buildings,presenting much the appearance of earthly farms.  There were manytrees, methodically arranged, and some of them were of enormous height;there were animals in some of the enclosures, and they announced theirpresence by terrified squealings and snortings as they scented ourqueer, wild beasts and wilder human beings.
Only once did I perceive a human being, and that was at theintersection of our crossroad with the wide, white turnpike which cutseach cultivated district longitudinally at its exact center.  Thefellow must have been sleeping beside the road, for, as I came abreastof him, he raised upon one elbow and after a single glance at theapproaching caravan leaped shrieking to his feet and fled madly downthe road, scaling a nearby wall with the agility of a scared cat.  TheTharks paid him not the slightest attention; they were not out upon thewarpath, and the only sign that I had that they had seen him was aquickening of the pace of the caravan as we hastened toward thebordering desert which marked our entrance into the realm of Tal Hajus.
Not once did I have speech with Dejah Thoris, as she sent no word to methat I would be welcome at her chariot, and my foolish pride kept mefrom making any advances.  I verily believe that a man's way with womenis in inverse ratio to his prowess among men.  The weakling and thesaphead have often great ability to charm the fair sex, while thefighting man who can face a thousand real dangers unafraid, sits hidingin the shadows like some frightened child.
Just thirty days after my advent upon Barsoom we entered the ancientcity of Thark, from whose long-forgotten people this horde of green menhave stolen even their name.  The hordes of Thark number some thirtythousand souls, and are divided into twenty-five communities.  Eachcommunity has its own jed and lesser chieftains, but all are under therule of Tal Hajus, Jeddak of Thark.  Five communities make theirheadquarters at the city of Thark, and the balance are scattered amongother deserted cities of ancient Mars throughout the district claimedby Tal Hajus.
We made our entry into the great central plaza early in the afternoon.There were no enthusiastic friendly greetings for the returnedexpedition.  Those who chanced to be in sight spoke the names ofwarriors or women with whom they came in direct contact, in the formalgreeting of their kind, but when it was discovered that they broughttwo captives a greater interest was aroused, and Dejah Thoris and Iwere the centers of inquiring groups.
We were soon assigned to new quarters, and the balance of the day wasdevoted to settling ourselves to the changed conditions.  My home nowwas upon an avenue leading into the plaza from the south, the mainartery down which we had marched from the gates of the city.  I was atthe far end of the square and had an entire building to myself.  Thesame grandeur of architecture which was so noticeable a characteristicof Korad was in evidence here, only, if that were possible, on a largerand richer scale.  My quarters would have been suitable for housing thegreatest of earthly emperors, but to these queer creatures nothingabout a building appealed to them but its size and the enormity of itschambers; the larger the building, the more desirable; and so Tal Hajusoccupied what must have been an enormous public building, the largestin the city, but entirely unfitted for residence purposes; the nextlargest was reserved for Lorquas Ptomel, the next for the jed of alesser rank, and so on to the bottom of the list of five jeds.  Thewarriors occupied the buildings with the chieftains to whose retinuesthey belonged; or, if they preferred, sought shelter among any of thethousands of untenanted buildings in their own quarter of town; eachcommunity being assigned a certain section of the city.  The selectionof building had to be made in accordance with these divisions, exceptin so far as the jeds were concerned, they all occupying edifices whichfronted upon the plaza.
When I had finally put my house in order, or rather seen that it hadbeen done, it was nearing sunset, and I hastened out with the intentionof locating Sola and her charges, as I had determined upon havingspeech with Dejah Thoris and trying to impress on her the necessity ofour at least patching up a truce until I could find some way of aidingher to escape.  I searched in vain until the upper rim of the great redsun was just disappearing behind the horizon and then I spied the uglyhead of Woola peering from a second-story window on the opposite sideof the very street where I was quartered, but nearer the plaza.
Without waiting for a further invitation I bolted up the winding runwaywhich led to the second floor, and entering a great chamber at thefront of the building was greeted by the frenzied Woola, who threw hisgreat carcass upon me, nearly hurling me to the floor; the poor oldfellow was so glad to see me that I thought he would devour me, hishead split from ear to ear, showing his three rows of tusks in hishobgoblin smile.
Quieting him with a word of command and a caress, I looked hurriedlythrough the approaching gloom for a sign of Dejah Thoris, and then, notseeing her, I called her name.  There was an answering murmur from thefar corner of the apartment, and with a couple of quick strides I wasstanding beside her where she crouched among the furs and silks upon anancient carved wooden seat.  As I waited she rose to her full heightand looking me straight in the eye said:
"What would Dotar Sojat, Thark, of Dejah Thoris his captive?"
"Dejah Thoris, I do not know how I have angered you.  It was furtherestfrom my desire to hurt or offend you, whom I had hoped to protect andcomfort.  Have none of me if it is your will, but that you must aid mein effecting your escape, if such a thing be possible, is not myrequest, but my command.  When you are safe once more at your father'scourt you may do with me as you please, but from now on until that dayI am your master, and you must obey and aid me."
She looked at me long and earnestly and I thought that she wassoftening toward me.
"I understand your words, Dotar Sojat," she replied, "but you I do notunderstand.  You are a queer mixture of child and man, of brute andnoble.  I only wish that I might read your heart."
"Look down at your feet, Dejah Thoris; it lies there now where it haslain since that other night at Korad, and where it will ever liebeating alone for you until death stills it forever."
She took a little step toward me, her beautiful hands outstretched in astrange, groping gesture.
"What do you mean, John Carter?" she whispered.  "What are you sayingto me?"
"I am saying what I had promised myself that I would not say to you, atleast until you were no longer a captive among the green men; what fromyour attitude toward me for the past twenty days I had thought never tosay to you; I am saying, Dejah Thoris, that I am yours, body and soul,to serve you, to fight for you, and to die for you.  Only one thing Iask of you in return, and that is that you make no sign, either ofcondemnation or of approbation of my words until you are safe amongyour own people, and that whatever sentiments you harbor toward me theybe not influenced or colored by gratitude; whatever I may do to serveyou will be prompted solely from selfish motives, since it gives memore pleasure to serve you than not."
"I will respect your wishes, John Carter, because I understand themotives which prompt them, and I accept your service no more willinglythan I bow to your authority; your word shall be my law.  I have twicewronged you in my thoughts and again I ask your forgiveness."
Further conversation of a personal nature was prevented by the entranceof Sola, who was much agitated and wholly unlike her usual calm andpossessed self.
"That horrible Sarkoja has been before Tal Hajus," she cried, "and fromwhat I heard upon the plaza there is little hope for either of you."
"What do they say?" inquired Dejah Thoris.
"That you will be thrown to the wild calots [dogs] in the great arenaas soon as the hordes have assembled for the yearly games."
"Sola," I said, "you are a Thark, but you hate and loathe the customsof your people as much as we do.  Will you not accompany us in onesupreme effort to escape?  I am sure that Dejah Thoris can offer you ahome and protection among her people, and your fate can be no worseamong them than it must ever be here."
"Yes," cried Dejah Thoris, "come with us, Sola, you will be better offamong the red men of Helium than you are here, and I can promise younot only a home with us, but the love and affection your nature cravesand which must always be denied you by the customs of your own race.Come with us, Sola; we might go without you, but your fate would beterrible if they thought you had connived to aid us.  I know that eventhat fear would not tempt you to interfere in our escape, but we wantyou with us, we want you to come to a land of sunshine and happiness,amongst a people who know the meaning of love, of sympathy, and ofgratitude.  Say that you will, Sola; tell me that you will."
"The great waterway which leads to Helium is but fifty miles to thesouth," murmured Sola, half to herself; "a swift thoat might make it inthree hours; and then to Helium it is five hundred miles, most of theway through thinly settled districts.  They would know and they wouldfollow us.  We might hide among the great trees for a time, but thechances are small indeed for escape.  They would follow us to the verygates of Helium, and they would take toll of life at every step; you donot know them."
"Is there no other way we might reach Helium?" I asked.  "Can you notdraw me a rough map of the country we must traverse, Dejah Thoris?"
"Yes," she replied, and taking a great diamond from her hair she drewupon the marble floor the first map of Barsoomian territory I had everseen.  It was crisscrossed in every direction with long straight lines,sometimes running parallel and sometimes converging toward some greatcircle.  The lines, she said, were waterways; the circles, cities; andone far to the northwest of us she pointed out as Helium.  There wereother cities closer, but she said she feared to enter many of them, asthey were not all friendly toward Helium.
[Illustration: She drew upon the marble floor the first map of theBarsoomian territory I had ever seen.]
Finally, after studying the map carefully in the moonlight which nowflooded the room, I pointed out a waterway far to the north of us whichalso seemed to lead to Helium.
"Does not this pierce your grandfather's territory?" I asked.
"Yes," she answered, "but it is two hundred miles north of us; it isone of the waterways we crossed on the trip to Thark."
"They would never suspect that we would try for that distant waterway,"I answered, "and that is why I think that it is the best route for ourescape."
Sola agreed with me, and it was decided that we should leave Thark thissame night; just as quickly, in fact, as I could find and saddle mythoats.  Sola was to ride one and Dejah Thoris and I the other; each ofus carrying sufficient food and drink to last us for two days, sincethe animals could not be urged too rapidly for so long a distance.
I directed Sola to proceed with Dejah Thoris along one of the lessfrequented avenues to the southern boundary of the city, where I wouldovertake them with the thoats as quickly as possible; then, leavingthem to gather what food, silks, and furs we were to need, I slippedquietly to the rear of the first floor, and entered the courtyard,where our animals were moving restlessly about, as was their habit,before settling down for the night.
In the shadows of the buildings and out beneath the radiance of theMartian moons moved the great herd of thoats and zitidars, the lattergrunting their low gutturals and the former occasionally emitting thesharp squeal which denotes the almost habitual state of rage in whichthese creatures passed their existence.  They were quieter now, owingto the absence of man, but as they scented me they became more restlessand their hideous noise increased.  It was risky business, thisentering a paddock of thoats alone and at night; first, because theirincreasing noisiness might warn the nearby warriors that something wasamiss, and also because for the slightest cause, or for no cause at allsome great bull thoat might take it upon himself to lead a charge uponme.
Having no desire to awaken their nasty tempers upon such a night asthis, where so much depended upon secrecy and dispatch, I hugged theshadows of the buildings, ready at an instant's warning to leap intothe safety of a nearby door or window.  Thus I moved silently to thegreat gates which opened upon the street at the back of the court, andas I neared the exit I called softly to my two animals.  How I thankedthe kind providence which had given me the foresight to win the loveand confidence of these wild dumb brutes, for presently from the farside of the court I saw two huge bulks forcing their way toward methrough the surging mountains of flesh.
They came quite close to me, rubbing their muzzles against my body andnosing for the bits of food it was always my practice to reward themwith.  Opening the gates I ordered the two great beasts to pass out,and then slipping quietly after them I closed the portals behind me.
I did not saddle or mount the animals there, but instead walked quietlyin the shadows of the buildings toward an unfrequented avenue which ledtoward the point I had arranged to meet Dejah Thoris and Sola.  Withthe noiselessness of disembodied spirits we moved stealthily along thedeserted streets, but not until we were within sight of the plainbeyond the city did I commence to breathe freely.  I was sure that Solaand Dejah Thoris would find no difficulty in reaching our rendezvousundetected, but with my great thoats I was not so sure for myself, asit was quite unusual for warriors to leave the city after dark; in factthere was no place for them to go within any but a long ride.
I reached the appointed meeting place safely, but as Dejah Thoris andSola were not there I led my animals into the entrance hall of one ofthe large buildings.  Presuming that one of the other women of the samehousehold may have come in to speak to Sola, and so delayed theirdeparture, I did not feel any undue apprehension until nearly an hourhad passed without a sign of them, and by the time another half hourhad crawled away I was becoming filled with grave anxiety.  Then therebroke upon the stillness of the night the sound of an approachingparty, which, from the noise, I knew could be no fugitives creepingstealthily toward liberty.  Soon the party was near me, and from theblack shadows of my entranceway I perceived a score of mountedwarriors, who, in passing, dropped a dozen words that fetched my heartclean into the top of my head.
"He would likely have arranged to meet them just without the city, andso--"  I heard no more, they had passed on; but it was enough.  Ourplan had been discovered, and the chances for escape from now on to thefearful end would be small indeed.  My one hope now was to returnundetected to the quarters of Dejah Thoris and learn what fate hadovertaken her, but how to do it with these great monstrous thoats uponmy hands, now that the city probably was aroused by the knowledge of myescape was a problem of no mean proportions.
Suddenly an idea occurred to me, and acting on my knowledge of theconstruction of the buildings of these ancient Martian cities with ahollow court within the center of each square, I groped my way blindlythrough the dark chambers, calling the great thoats after me.  They haddifficulty in negotiating some of the doorways, but as the buildingsfronting the city's principal exposures were all designed upon amagnificent scale, they were able to wriggle through without stickingfast; and thus we finally made the inner court where I found, as I hadexpected, the usual carpet of moss-like vegetation which would provetheir food and drink until I could return them to their own enclosure.That they would be as quiet and contented here as elsewhere I wasconfident, nor was there but the remotest possibility that they wouldbe discovered, as the green men had no great desire to enter theseoutlying buildings, which were frequented by the only thing, I believe,which caused them the sensation of fear--the great white apes ofBarsoom.
Removing the saddle trappings, I hid them just within the rear doorwayof the building through which we had entered the court, and, turningthe beasts loose, quickly made my way across the court to the rear ofthe buildings upon the further side, and thence to the avenue beyond.Waiting in the doorway of the building until I was assured that no onewas approaching, I hurried across to the opposite side and through thefirst doorway to the court beyond; thus, crossing through court aftercourt with only the slight chance of detection which the necessarycrossing of the avenues entailed, I made my way in safety to thecourtyard in the rear of Dejah Thoris' quarters.
Here, of course, I found the beasts of the warriors who quartered inthe adjacent buildings, and the warriors themselves I might expect tomeet within if I entered; but, fortunately for me, I had another andsafer method of reaching the upper story where Dejah Thoris should befound, and, after first determining as nearly as possible which of thebuildings she occupied, for I had never observed them before from thecourt side, I took advantage of my relatively great strength andagility and sprang upward until I grasped the sill of a second-storywindow which I thought to be in the rear of her apartment.  Drawingmyself inside the room I moved stealthily toward the front of thebuilding, and not until I had quite reached the doorway of her room wasI made aware by voices that it was occupied.
I did not rush headlong in, but listened without to assure myself thatit was Dejah Thoris and that it was safe to venture within.  It waswell indeed that I took this precaution, for the conversation I heardwas in the low gutturals of men, and the words which finally came to meproved a most timely warning.  The speaker was a chieftain and he wasgiving orders to four of his warriors.
"And when he returns to this chamber," he was saying, "as he surelywill when he finds she does not meet him at the city's edge, you fourare to spring upon him and disarm him.  It will require the combinedstrength of all of you to do it if the reports they bring back fromKorad are correct.  When you have him fast bound bear him to the vaultsbeneath the jeddak's quarters and chain him securely where he may befound when Tal Hajus wishes him.  Allow him to speak with none, norpermit any other to enter this apartment before he comes.  There willbe no danger of the girl returning, for by this time she is safe in thearms of Tal Hajus, and may all her ancestors have pity upon her, forTal Hajus will have none; the great Sarkoja has done a noble night'swork.  I go, and if you fail to capture him when he comes, I commendyour carcasses to the cold bosom of Iss."



CHAPTER XVII
A COSTLY RECAPTURE

As the speaker ceased he turned to leave the apartment by the doorwhere I was standing, but I needed to wait no longer; I had heardenough to fill my soul with dread, and stealing quietly away I returnedto the courtyard by the way I had come.  My plan of action was formedupon the instant, and crossing the square and the bordering avenue uponthe opposite side I soon stood within the courtyard of Tal Hajus.
The brilliantly lighted apartments of the first floor told me wherefirst to seek, and advancing to the windows I peered within.  I soondiscovered that my approach was not to be the easy thing I had hoped,for the rear rooms bordering the court were filled with warriors andwomen.  I then glanced up at the stories above, discovering that thethird was apparently unlighted, and so decided to make my entrance tothe building from that point.  It was the work of but a moment for meto reach the windows above, and soon I had drawn myself within thesheltering shadows of the unlighted third floor.
Fortunately the room I had selected was untenanted, and creepingnoiselessly to the corridor beyond I discovered a light in theapartments ahead of me.  Reaching what appeared to be a doorway Idiscovered that it was but an opening upon an immense inner chamberwhich towered from the first floor, two stories below me, to thedome-like roof of the building, high above my head.  The floor of thisgreat circular hall was thronged with chieftains, warriors and women,and at one end was a great raised platform upon which squatted the mosthideous beast I had ever put my eyes upon.  He had all the cold, hard,cruel, terrible features of the green warriors, but accentuated anddebased by the animal passions to which he had given himself over formany years.  There was not a mark of dignity or pride upon his bestialcountenance, while his enormous bulk spread itself out upon theplatform where he squatted like some huge devil fish, his six limbsaccentuating the similarity in a horrible and startling manner.
But the sight that froze me with apprehension was that of Dejah Thorisand Sola standing there before him, and the fiendish leer of him as helet his great protruding eyes gloat upon the lines of her beautifulfigure.  She was speaking, but I could not hear what she said, norcould I make out the low grumbling of his reply.  She stood there erectbefore him, her head high held, and even at the distance I was fromthem I could read the scorn and disgust upon her face as she let herhaughty glance rest without sign of fear upon him.  She was indeed theproud daughter of a thousand jeddaks, every inch of her dear, preciouslittle body; so small, so frail beside the towering warriors aroundher, but in her majesty dwarfing them into insignificance; she was themightiest figure among them and I verily believe that they felt it.
Presently Tal Hajus made a sign that the chamber be cleared, and thatthe prisoners be left alone before him.  Slowly the chieftains, thewarriors and the women melted away into the shadows of the surroundingchambers, and Dejah Thoris and Sola stood alone before the jeddak ofthe Tharks.
One chieftain alone had hesitated before departing; I saw him standingin the shadows of a mighty column, his fingers nervously toying withthe hilt of his great-sword and his cruel eyes bent in implacablehatred upon Tal Hajus.  It was Tars Tarkas, and I could read histhoughts as they were an open book for the undisguised loathing uponhis face.  He was thinking of that other woman who, forty years ago,had stood before this beast, and could I have spoken a word into hisear at that moment the reign of Tal Hajus would have been over; butfinally he also strode from the room, not knowing that he left his owndaughter at the mercy of the creature he most loathed.
Tal Hajus arose, and I, half fearing, half anticipating his intentions,hurried to the winding runway which led to the floors below.  No onewas near to intercept me, and I reached the main floor of the chamberunobserved, taking my station in the shadow of the same column thatTars Tarkas had but just deserted.  As I reached the floor Tal Hajuswas speaking.
"Princess of Helium, I might wring a mighty ransom from your peoplewould I but return you to them unharmed, but a thousand times ratherwould I watch that beautiful face writhe in the agony of torture; itshall be long drawn out, that I promise you; ten days of pleasure wereall too short to show the love I harbor for your race.  The terrors ofyour death shall haunt the slumbers of the red men through all the agesto come; they will shudder in the shadows of the night as their fatherstell them of the awful vengeance of the green men; of the power andmight and hate and cruelty of Tal Hajus.  But before the torture youshall be mine for one short hour, and word of that too shall go forthto Tardos Mors, Jeddak of Helium, your grandfather, that he may grovelupon the ground in the agony of his sorrow.  Tomorrow the torture willcommence; tonight thou art Tal Hajus'; come!"
He sprang down from the platform and grasped her roughly by the arm,but scarcely had he touched her than I leaped between them.  Myshort-sword, sharp and gleaming was in my right hand; I could haveplunged it into his putrid heart before he realized that I was uponhim; but as I raised my arm to strike I thought of Tars Tarkas, and,with all my rage, with all my hatred, I could not rob him of that sweetmoment for which he had lived and hoped all these long, weary years,and so, instead, I swung my good right fist full upon the point of hisjaw.  Without a sound he slipped to the floor as one dead.
In the same deathly silence I grasped Dejah Thoris by the hand, andmotioning Sola to follow we sped noiselessly from the chamber and tothe floor above.  Unseen we reached a rear window and with the strapsand leather of my trappings I lowered, first Sola and then Dejah Thoristo the ground below.  Dropping lightly after them I drew them rapidlyaround the court in the shadows of the buildings, and thus we returnedover the same course I had so recently followed from the distantboundary of the city.
We finally came upon my thoats in the courtyard where I had left them,and placing the trappings upon them we hastened through the building tothe avenue beyond.  Mounting, Sola upon one beast, and Dejah Thorisbehind me upon the other, we rode from the city of Thark through thehills to the south.
Instead of circling back around the city to the northwest and towardthe nearest waterway which lay so short a distance from us, we turnedto the northeast and struck out upon the mossy waste across which, fortwo hundred dangerous and weary miles, lay another main artery leadingto Helium.
No word was spoken until we had left the city far behind, but I couldhear the quiet sobbing of Dejah Thoris as she clung to me with her dearhead resting against my shoulder.
"If we make it, my chieftain, the debt of Helium will be a mighty one;greater than she can ever pay you; and should we not make it," shecontinued, "the debt is no less, though Helium will never know, for youhave saved the last of our line from worse than death."
I did not answer, but instead reached to my side and pressed the littlefingers of her I loved where they clung to me for support, and then, inunbroken silence, we sped over the yellow, moonlit moss; each of usoccupied with his own thoughts.  For my part I could not be other thanjoyful had I tried, with Dejah Thoris' warm body pressed close to mine,and with all our unpassed danger my heart was singing as gaily asthough we were already entering the gates of Helium.
Our earlier plans had been so sadly upset that we now found ourselveswithout food or drink, and I alone was armed.  We therefore urged ourbeasts to a speed that must tell on them sorely before we could hope tosight the ending of the first stage of our journey.
We rode all night and all the following day with only a few shortrests.  On the second night both we and our animals were completelyfagged, and so we lay down upon the moss and slept for some five or sixhours, taking up the journey once more before daylight.  All thefollowing day we rode, and when, late in the afternoon we had sightedno distant trees, the mark of the great waterways throughout allBarsoom, the terrible truth flashed upon us--we were lost.
Evidently we had circled, but which way it was difficult to say, nordid it seem possible with the sun to guide us by day and the moons andstars by night.  At any rate no waterway was in sight, and the entireparty was almost ready to drop from hunger, thirst and fatigue.  Farahead of us and a trifle to the right we could distinguish the outlinesof low mountains.  These we decided to attempt to reach in the hopethat from some ridge we might discern the missing waterway.  Night fellupon us before we reached our goal, and, almost fainting from wearinessand weakness, we lay down and slept.
I was awakened early in the morning by some huge body pressing close tomine, and opening my eyes with a start I beheld my blessed old Woolasnuggling close to me; the faithful brute had followed us across thattrackless waste to share our fate, whatever it might be.  Putting myarms about his neck I pressed my cheek close to his, nor am I ashamedthat I did it, nor of the tears that came to my eyes as I thought ofhis love for me.  Shortly after this Dejah Thoris and Sola awakened,and it was decided that we push on at once in an effort to gain thehills.
We had gone scarcely a mile when I noticed that my thoat was commencingto stumble and stagger in a most pitiful manner, although we had notattempted to force them out of a walk since about noon of the precedingday.  Suddenly he lurched wildly to one side and pitched violently tothe ground.  Dejah Thoris and I were thrown clear of him and fell uponthe soft moss with scarcely a jar; but the poor beast was in a pitiablecondition, not even being able to rise, although relieved of ourweight.  Sola told me that the coolness of the night, when it fell,together with the rest would doubtless revive him, and so I decided notto kill him, as was my first intention, as I had thought it cruel toleave him alone there to die of hunger and thirst.  Relieving him ofhis trappings, which I flung down beside him, we left the poor fellowto his fate, and pushed on with the one thoat as best we could.  Solaand I walked, making Dejah Thoris ride, much against her will.  In thisway we had progressed to within about a mile of the hills we wereendeavoring to reach when Dejah Thoris, from her point of vantage uponthe thoat, cried out that she saw a great party of mounted men filingdown from a pass in the hills several miles away.  Sola and I bothlooked in the direction she indicated, and there, plainly discernible,were several hundred mounted warriors.  They seemed to be headed in asouthwesterly direction, which would take them away from us.
They doubtless were Thark warriors who had been sent out to capture us,and we breathed a great sigh of relief that they were traveling in theopposite direction.  Quickly lifting Dejah Thoris from the thoat, Icommanded the animal to lie down and we three did the same, presentingas small an object as possible for fear of attracting the attention ofthe warriors toward us.
We could see them as they filed out of the pass, just for an instant,before they were lost to view behind a friendly ridge; to us a mostprovidential ridge; since, had they been in view for any great lengthof time, they scarcely could have failed to discover us.  As whatproved to be the last warrior came into view from the pass, he haltedand, to our consternation, threw his small but powerful fieldglass tohis eye and scanned the sea bottom in all directions.  Evidently he wasa chieftain, for in certain marching formations among the green men achieftain brings up the extreme rear of the column.  As his glass swungtoward us our hearts stopped in our breasts, and I could feel the coldsweat start from every pore in my body.
Presently it swung full upon us and--stopped.  The tension on ournerves was near the breaking point, and I doubt if any of us breathedfor the few moments he held us covered by his glass; and then helowered it and we could see him shout a command to the warriors who hadpassed from our sight behind the ridge.  He did not wait for them tojoin him, however, instead he wheeled his thoat and came tearing madlyin our direction.
There was but one slight chance and that we must take quickly.  Raisingmy strange Martian rifle to my shoulder I sighted and touched thebutton which controlled the trigger; there was a sharp explosion as themissile reached its goal, and the charging chieftain pitched backwardfrom his flying mount.
Springing to my feet I urged the thoat to rise, and directed Sola totake Dejah Thoris with her upon him and make a mighty effort to reachthe hills before the green warriors were upon us.  I knew that in theravines and gullies they might find a temporary hiding place, and eventhough they died there of hunger and thirst it would be better so thanthat they fell into the hands of the Tharks.  Forcing my two revolversupon them as a slight means of protection, and, as a last resort, as anescape for themselves from the horrid death which recapture wouldsurely mean, I lifted Dejah Thoris in my arms and placed her upon thethoat behind Sola, who had already mounted at my command.
"Good-bye, my princess," I whispered, "we may meet in Helium yet.  Ihave escaped from worse plights than this," and I tried to smile as Ilied.
"What," she cried, "are you not coming with us?"
"How may I, Dejah Thoris?  Someone must hold these fellows off for awhile, and I can better escape them alone than could the three of ustogether."
She sprang quickly from the thoat and, throwing her dear arms about myneck, turned to Sola, saying with quiet dignity: "Fly, Sola!  DejahThoris remains to die with the man she loves."
Those words are engraved upon my heart.  Ah, gladly would I give up mylife a thousand times could I only hear them once again; but I couldnot then give even a second to the rapture of her sweet embrace, andpressing my lips to hers for the first time, I picked her up bodily andtossed her to her seat behind Sola again, commanding the latter inperemptory tones to hold her there by force, and then, slapping thethoat upon the flank, I saw them borne away; Dejah Thoris struggling tothe last to free herself from Sola's grasp.
Turning, I beheld the green warriors mounting the ridge and looking fortheir chieftain.  In a moment they saw him, and then me; but scarcelyhad they discovered me than I commenced firing, lying flat upon mybelly in the moss.  I had an even hundred rounds in the magazine of myrifle, and another hundred in the belt at my back, and I kept up acontinuous stream of fire until I saw all of the warriors who had beenfirst to return from behind the ridge either dead or scurrying to cover.
My respite was short-lived however, for soon the entire party,numbering some thousand men, came charging into view, racing madlytoward me.  I fired until my rifle was empty and they were almost uponme, and then a glance showing me that Dejah Thoris and Sola haddisappeared among the hills, I sprang up, throwing down my useless gun,and started away in the direction opposite to that taken by Sola andher charge.
If ever Martians had an exhibition of jumping, it was granted thoseastonished warriors on that day long years ago, but while it led themaway from Dejah Thoris it did not distract their attention fromendeavoring to capture me.
They raced wildly after me until, finally, my foot struck a projectingpiece of quartz, and down I went sprawling upon the moss.  As I lookedup they were upon me, and although I drew my long-sword in an attemptto sell my life as dearly as possible, it was soon over.  I reeledbeneath their blows which fell upon me in perfect torrents; my headswam; all was black, and I went down beneath them to oblivion.



CHAPTER XVIII
CHAINED IN WARHOON

It must have been several hours before I regained consciousness and Iwell remember the feeling of surprise which swept over me as I realizedthat I was not dead.
I was lying among a pile of sleeping silks and furs in the corner of asmall room in which were several green warriors, and bending over mewas an ancient and ugly female.
As I opened my eyes she turned to one of the warriors, saying,
"He will live, O Jed."
"'Tis well," replied the one so addressed, rising and approaching mycouch, "he should render rare sport for the great games."
And now as my eyes fell upon him, I saw that he was no Thark, for hisornaments and metal were not of that horde.  He was a huge fellow,terribly scarred about the face and chest, and with one broken tusk anda missing ear.  Strapped on either breast were human skulls anddepending from these a number of dried human hands.
His reference to the great games of which I had heard so much whileamong the Tharks convinced me that I had but jumped from purgatory intogehenna.
After a few more words with the female, during which she assured himthat I was now fully fit to travel, the jed ordered that we mount andride after the main column.
I was strapped securely to as wild and unmanageable a thoat as I hadever seen, and, with a mounted warrior on either side to prevent thebeast from bolting, we rode forth at a furious pace in pursuit of thecolumn.  My wounds gave me but little pain, so wonderfully and rapidlyhad the applications and injections of the female exercised theirtherapeutic powers, and so deftly had she bound and plastered theinjuries.
Just before dark we reached the main body of troops shortly after theyhad made camp for the night.  I was immediately taken before theleader, who proved to be the jeddak of the hordes of Warhoon.
Like the jed who had brought me, he was frightfully scarred, and alsodecorated with the breastplate of human skulls and dried dead handswhich seemed to mark all the greater warriors among the Warhoons, aswell as to indicate their awful ferocity, which greatly transcends eventhat of the Tharks.
The jeddak, Bar Comas, who was comparatively young, was the object ofthe fierce and jealous hatred of his old lieutenant, Dak Kova, the jedwho had captured me, and I could not but note the almost studiedefforts which the latter made to affront his superior.
He entirely omitted the usual formal salutation as we entered thepresence of the jeddak, and as he pushed me roughly before the ruler heexclaimed in a loud and menacing voice.
"I have brought a strange creature wearing the metal of a Thark whom itis my pleasure to have battle with a wild thoat at the great games."
"He will die as Bar Comas, your jeddak, sees fit, if at all," repliedthe young ruler, with emphasis and dignity.
"If at all?" roared Dak Kova.  "By the dead hands at my throat but heshall die, Bar Comas.  No maudlin weakness on your part shall save him.O, would that Warhoon were ruled by a real jeddak rather than by awater-hearted weakling from whom even old Dak Kova could tear the metalwith his bare hands!"
Bar Comas eyed the defiant and insubordinate chieftain for an instant,his expression one of haughty, fearless contempt and hate, and thenwithout drawing a weapon and without uttering a word he hurled himselfat the throat of his defamer.
I never before had seen two green Martian warriors battle with nature'sweapons and the exhibition of animal ferocity which ensued was asfearful a thing as the most disordered imagination could picture.  Theytore at each others' eyes and ears with their hands and with theirgleaming tusks repeatedly slashed and gored until both were cut fairlyto ribbons from head to foot.
Bar Comas had much the better of the battle as he was stronger, quickerand more intelligent.  It soon seemed that the encounter was donesaving only the final death thrust when Bar Comas slipped in breakingaway from a clinch.  It was the one little opening that Dak Kovaneeded, and hurling himself at the body of his adversary he buried hissingle mighty tusk in Bar Comas' groin and with a last powerful effortripped the young jeddak wide open the full length of his body, thegreat tusk finally wedging in the bones of Bar Comas' jaw.  Victor andvanquished rolled limp and lifeless upon the moss, a huge mass of tornand bloody flesh.
Bar Comas was stone dead, and only the most herculean efforts on thepart of Dak Kova's females saved him from the fate he deserved.  Threedays later he walked without assistance to the body of Bar Comas which,by custom, had not been moved from where it fell, and placing his footupon the neck of his erstwhile ruler he assumed the title of Jeddak ofWarhoon.
The dead jeddak's hands and head were removed to be added to theornaments of his conqueror, and then his women cremated what remained,amid wild and terrible laughter.
The injuries to Dak Kova had delayed the march so greatly that it wasdecided to give up the expedition, which was a raid upon a small Tharkcommunity in retaliation for the destruction of the incubator, untilafter the great games, and the entire body of warriors, ten thousand innumber, turned back toward Warhoon.
My introduction to these cruel and bloodthirsty people was but an indexto the scenes I witnessed almost daily while with them.  They are asmaller horde than the Tharks but much more ferocious.  Not a daypassed but that some members of the various Warhoon communities met indeadly combat.  I have seen as high as eight mortal duels within asingle day.
We reached the city of Warhoon after some three days march and I wasimmediately cast into a dungeon and heavily chained to the floor andwalls.  Food was brought me at intervals but owing to the utterdarkness of the place I do not know whether I lay there days, or weeks,or months.  It was the most horrible experience of all my life and thatmy mind did not give way to the terrors of that inky blackness has beena wonder to me ever since.  The place was filled with creeping,crawling things; cold, sinuous bodies passed over me when I lay down,and in the darkness I occasionally caught glimpses of gleaming, fieryeyes, fixed in horrible intentness upon me.  No sound reached me fromthe world above and no word would my jailer vouchsafe when my food wasbrought to me, although I at first bombarded him with questions.
Finally all the hatred and maniacal loathing for these awful creatureswho had placed me in this horrible place was centered by my totteringreason upon this single emissary who represented to me the entire hordeof Warhoons.
I had noticed that he always advanced with his dim torch to where hecould place the food within my reach and as he stooped to place it uponthe floor his head was about on a level with my breast.  So, with thecunning of a madman, I backed into the far corner of my cell when nextI heard him approaching and gathering a little slack of the great chainwhich held me in my hand I waited his coming, crouching like some beastof prey.  As he stooped to place my food upon the ground I swung thechain above my head and crashed the links with all my strength upon hisskull.  Without a sound he slipped to the floor, stone dead.
Laughing and chattering like the idiot I was fast becoming I fell uponhis prostrate form my fingers feeling for his dead throat.  Presentlythey came in contact with a small chain at the end of which dangled anumber of keys.  The touch of my fingers on these keys brought back myreason with the suddenness of thought.  No longer was I a jibberingidiot, but a sane, reasoning man with the means of escape within myvery hands.
As I was groping to remove the chain from about my victim's neck Iglanced up into the darkness to see six pairs of gleaming eyes fixed,unwinking, upon me.  Slowly they approached and slowly I shrank backfrom the awful horror of them.  Back into my corner I crouched holdingmy hands palms out, before me, and stealthily on came the awful eyesuntil they reached the dead body at my feet.  Then slowly theyretreated but this time with a strange grating sound and finally theydisappeared in some black and distant recess of my dungeon.



CHAPTER XIX
BATTLING IN THE ARENA

Slowly I regained my composure and finally essayed again to attempt toremove the keys from the dead body of my former jailer.  But as Ireached out into the darkness to locate it I found to my horror that itwas gone.  Then the truth flashed on me; the owners of those gleamingeyes had dragged my prize away from me to be devoured in theirneighboring lair; as they had been waiting for days, for weeks, formonths, through all this awful eternity of my imprisonment to drag mydead carcass to their feast.
For two days no food was brought me, but then a new messenger appearedand my incarceration went on as before, but not again did I allow myreason to be submerged by the horror of my position.
Shortly after this episode another prisoner was brought in and chainednear me.  By the dim torch light I saw that he was a red Martian and Icould scarcely await the departure of his guards to address him.  Astheir retreating footsteps died away in the distance, I called outsoftly the Martian word of greeting, kaor.
"Who are you who speaks out of the darkness?" he answered
"John Carter, a friend of the red men of Helium."
"I am of Helium," he said, "but I do not recall your name."
And then I told him my story as I have written it here, omitting onlyany reference to my love for Dejah Thoris.  He was much excited by thenews of Helium's princess and seemed quite positive that she and Solacould easily have reached a point of safety from where they left me.He said that he knew the place well because the defile through whichthe Warhoon warriors had passed when they discovered us was the onlyone ever used by them when marching to the south.
"Dejah Thoris and Sola entered the hills not five miles from a greatwaterway and are now probably quite safe," he assured me.
My fellow prisoner was Kantos Kan, a padwar (lieutenant) in the navy ofHelium.  He had been a member of the ill-fated expedition which hadfallen into the hands of the Tharks at the time of Dejah Thoris'capture, and he briefly related the events which followed the defeat ofthe battleships.
Badly injured and only partially manned they had limped slowly towardHelium, but while passing near the city of Zodanga, the capital ofHelium's hereditary enemies among the red men of Barsoom, they had beenattacked by a great body of war vessels and all but the craft to whichKantos Kan belonged were either destroyed or captured.  His vessel waschased for days by three of the Zodangan war ships but finally escapedduring the darkness of a moonless night.
Thirty days after the capture of Dejah Thoris, or about the time of ourcoming to Thark, his vessel had reached Helium with about ten survivorsof the original crew of seven hundred officers and men.  Immediatelyseven great fleets, each of one hundred mighty war ships, had beendispatched to search for Dejah Thoris, and from these vessels twothousand smaller craft had been kept out continuously in futile searchfor the missing princess.
Two green Martian communities had been wiped off the face of Barsoom bythe avenging fleets, but no trace of Dejah Thoris had been found.  Theyhad been searching among the northern hordes, and only within the pastfew days had they extended their quest to the south.
Kantos Kan had been detailed to one of the small one-man fliers and hadhad the misfortune to be discovered by the Warhoons while exploringtheir city.  The bravery and daring of the man won my greatest respectand admiration.  Alone he had landed at the city's boundary and on foothad penetrated to the buildings surrounding the plaza.  For two daysand nights he had explored their quarters and their dungeons in searchof his beloved princess only to fall into the hands of a party ofWarhoons as he was about to leave, after assuring himself that DejahThoris was not a captive there.
During the period of our incarceration Kantos Kan and I became wellacquainted, and formed a warm personal friendship.  A few days onlyelapsed, however, before we were dragged forth from our dungeon for thegreat games.  We were conducted early one morning to an enormousamphitheater, which instead of having been built upon the surface ofthe ground was excavated below the surface.  It had partially filledwith debris so that how large it had originally been was difficult tosay.  In its present condition it held the entire twenty thousandWarhoons of the assembled hordes.
The arena was immense but extremely uneven and unkempt.  Around it theWarhoons had piled building stone from some of the ruined edifices ofthe ancient city to prevent the animals and the captives from escapinginto the audience, and at each end had been constructed cages to holdthem until their turns came to meet some horrible death upon the arena.
Kantos Kan and I were confined together in one of the cages.  In theothers were wild calots, thoats, mad zitidars, green warriors, andwomen of other hordes, and many strange and ferocious wild beasts ofBarsoom which I had never before seen.  The din of their roaring,growling and squealing was deafening and the formidable appearance ofany one of them was enough to make the stoutest heart feel graveforebodings.
Kantos Kan explained to me that at the end of the day one of theseprisoners would gain freedom and the others would lie dead about thearena.  The winners in the various contests of the day would be pittedagainst each other until only two remained alive; the victor in thelast encounter being set free, whether animal or man.  The followingmorning the cages would be filled with a new consignment of victims,and so on throughout the ten days of the games.
Shortly after we had been caged the amphitheater began to fill andwithin an hour every available part of the seating space was occupied.Dak Kova, with his jeds and chieftains, sat at the center of one sideof the arena upon a large raised platform.
At a signal from Dak Kova the doors of two cages were thrown open and adozen green Martian females were driven to the center of the arena.Each was given a dagger and then, at the far end, a pack of twelvecalots, or wild dogs were loosed upon them.
As the brutes, growling and foaming, rushed upon the almost defenselesswomen I turned my head that I might not see the horrid sight.  Theyells and laughter of the green horde bore witness to the excellentquality of the sport and when I turned back to the arena, as Kantos Kantold me it was over, I saw three victorious calots, snarling andgrowling over the bodies of their prey.  The women had given a goodaccount of themselves.
Next a mad zitidar was loosed among the remaining dogs, and so it wentthroughout the long, hot, horrible day.
During the day I was pitted against first men and then beasts, but as Iwas armed with a long-sword and always outclassed my adversary inagility and generally in strength as well, it proved but child's playto me.  Time and time again I won the applause of the bloodthirstymultitude, and toward the end there were cries that I be taken from thearena and be made a member of the hordes of Warhoon.
Finally there were but three of us left, a great green warrior of somefar northern horde, Kantos Kan, and myself.
The other two were to battle and then I to fight the conqueror for theliberty which was accorded the final winner.
Kantos Kan had fought several times during the day and like myself hadalways proven victorious, but occasionally by the smallest of margins,especially when pitted against the green warriors.  I had little hopethat he could best his giant adversary who had mowed down all beforehim during the day.  The fellow towered nearly sixteen feet in height,while Kantos Kan was some inches under six feet.  As they advanced tomeet one another I saw for the first time a trick of Martianswordsmanship which centered Kantos Kan's every hope of victory andlife on one cast of the dice, for, as he came to within about twentyfeet of the huge fellow he threw his sword arm far behind him over hisshoulder and with a mighty sweep hurled his weapon point foremost atthe green warrior.  It flew true as an arrow and piercing the poordevil's heart laid him dead upon the arena.
Kantos Kan and I were now pitted against each other but as weapproached to the encounter I whispered to him to prolong the battleuntil nearly dark in the hope that we might find some means of escape.The horde evidently guessed that we had no hearts to fight each otherand so they howled in rage as neither of us placed a fatal thrust.Just as I saw the sudden coming of dark I whispered to Kantos Kan tothrust his sword between my left arm and my body.  As he did so Istaggered back clasping the sword tightly with my arm and thus fell tothe ground with his weapon apparently protruding from my chest.  KantosKan perceived my coup and stepping quickly to my side he placed hisfoot upon my neck and withdrawing his sword from my body gave me thefinal death blow through the neck which is supposed to sever thejugular vein, but in this instance the cold blade slipped harmlesslyinto the sand of the arena.  In the darkness which had now fallen nonecould tell but that he had really finished me.  I whispered to him togo and claim his freedom and then look for me in the hills east of thecity, and so he left me.
When the amphitheater had cleared I crept stealthily to the top and asthe great excavation lay far from the plaza and in an untenantedportion of the great dead city I had little trouble in reaching thehills beyond.



CHAPTER XX
IN THE ATMOSPHERE FACTORY

For two days I waited there for Kantos Kan, but as he did not come Istarted off on foot in a northwesterly direction toward a point wherehe had told me lay the nearest waterway.  My only food consisted ofvegetable milk from the plants which gave so bounteously of thispriceless fluid.
Through two long weeks I wandered, stumbling through the nights guidedonly by the stars and hiding during the days behind some protrudingrock or among the occasional hills I traversed.  Several times I wasattacked by wild beasts; strange, uncouth monstrosities that leapedupon me in the dark, so that I had ever to grasp my long-sword in myhand that I might be ready for them.  Usually my strange, newlyacquired telepathic power warned me in ample time, but once I was downwith vicious fangs at my jugular and a hairy face pressed close to minebefore I knew that I was even threatened.
What manner of thing was upon me I did not know, but that it was largeand heavy and many-legged I could feel.  My hands were at its throatbefore the fangs had a chance to bury themselves in my neck, and slowlyI forced the hairy face from me and closed my fingers, vise-like, uponits windpipe.
Without sound we lay there, the beast exerting every effort to reach mewith those awful fangs, and I straining to maintain my grip and chokethe life from it as I kept it from my throat.  Slowly my arms gave tothe unequal struggle, and inch by inch the burning eyes and gleamingtusks of my antagonist crept toward me, until, as the hairy facetouched mine again, I realized that all was over.  And then a livingmass of destruction sprang from the surrounding darkness full upon thecreature that held me pinioned to the ground.  The two rolled growlingupon the moss, tearing and rending one another in a frightful manner,but it was soon over and my preserver stood with lowered head above thethroat of the dead thing which would have killed me.
The nearer moon, hurtling suddenly above the horizon and lighting upthe Barsoomian scene, showed me that my preserver was Woola, but fromwhence he had come, or how found me, I was at a loss to know.  That Iwas glad of his companionship it is needless to say, but my pleasure atseeing him was tempered by anxiety as to the reason of his leavingDejah Thoris.  Only her death I felt sure, could account for hisabsence from her, so faithful I knew him to be to my commands.
By the light of the now brilliant moons I saw that he was but a shadowof his former self, and as he turned from my caress and commencedgreedily to devour the dead carcass at my feet I realized that the poorfellow was more than half starved.  I, myself, was in but little betterplight but I could not bring myself to eat the uncooked flesh and I hadno means of making a fire.  When Woola had finished his meal I againtook up my weary and seemingly endless wandering in quest of theelusive waterway.
At daybreak of the fifteenth day of my search I was overjoyed to seethe high trees that denoted the object of my search.  About noon Idragged myself wearily to the portals of a huge building which coveredperhaps four square miles and towered two hundred feet in the air.  Itshowed no aperture in the mighty walls other than the tiny door atwhich I sank exhausted, nor was there any sign of life about it.
I could find no bell or other method of making my presence known to theinmates of the place, unless a small round role in the wall near thedoor was for that purpose.  It was of about the bigness of a leadpencil and thinking that it might be in the nature of a speaking tube Iput my mouth to it and was about to call into it when a voice issuedfrom it asking me whom I might be, where from, and the nature of myerrand.
I explained that I had escaped from the Warhoons and was dying ofstarvation and exhaustion.
"You wear the metal of a green warrior and are followed by a calot, yetyou are of the figure of a red man.  In color you are neither green norred.  In the name of the ninth day, what manner of creature are you?"
"I am a friend of the red men of Barsoom and I am starving.  In thename of humanity open to us," I replied.
Presently the door commenced to recede before me until it had sunk intothe wall fifty feet, then it stopped and slid easily to the left,exposing a short, narrow corridor of concrete, at the further end ofwhich was another door, similar in every respect to the one I had justpassed.  No one was in sight, yet immediately we passed the first doorit slid gently into place behind us and receded rapidly to its originalposition in the front wall of the building.  As the door had slippedaside I had noted its great thickness, fully twenty feet, and as itreached its place once more after closing behind us, great cylinders ofsteel had dropped from the ceiling behind it and fitted their lowerends into apertures countersunk in the floor.
A second and third door receded before me and slipped to one side asthe first, before I reached a large inner chamber where I found foodand drink set out upon a great stone table.  A voice directed me tosatisfy my hunger and to feed my calot, and while I was thus engaged myinvisible host put me through a severe and searching cross-examination.
"Your statements are most remarkable," said the voice, on concludingits questioning, "but you are evidently speaking the truth, and it isequally evident that you are not of Barsoom.  I can tell that by theconformation of your brain and the strange location of your internalorgans and the shape and size of your heart."
"Can you see through me?" I exclaimed.
"Yes, I can see all but your thoughts, and were you a Barsoomian Icould read those."
Then a door opened at the far side of the chamber and a strange, driedup, little mummy of a man came toward me.  He wore but a single articleof clothing or adornment, a small collar of gold from which dependedupon his chest a great ornament as large as a dinner plate set solidwith huge diamonds, except for the exact center which was occupied by astrange stone, an inch in diameter, that scintillated nine differentand distinct rays; the seven colors of our earthly prism and twobeautiful rays which, to me, were new and nameless.  I cannot describethem any more than you could describe red to a blind man.  I only knowthat they were beautiful in the extreme.
The old man sat and talked with me for hours, and the strangest part ofour intercourse was that I could read his every thought while he couldnot fathom an iota from my mind unless I spoke.
[Illustration: The old man sat and talked with me for hours.]
I did not apprise him of my ability to sense his mental operations, andthus I learned a great deal which proved of immense value to me laterand which I would never have known had he suspected my strange power,for the Martians have such perfect control of their mental machinerythat they are able to direct their thoughts with absolute precision.
The building in which I found myself contained the machinery whichproduces that artificial atmosphere which sustains life on Mars.  Thesecret of the entire process hinges on the use of the ninth ray, one ofthe beautiful scintillations which I had noted emanating from the greatstone in my host's diadem.
This ray is separated from the other rays of the sun by means of finelyadjusted instruments placed upon the roof of the huge building,three-quarters of which is used for reservoirs in which the ninth rayis stored.  This product is then treated electrically, or rathercertain proportions of refined electric vibrations are incorporatedwith it, and the result is then pumped to the five principal aircenters of the planet where, as it is released, contact with the etherof space transforms it into atmosphere.
There is always sufficient reserve of the ninth ray stored in the greatbuilding to maintain the present Martian atmosphere for a thousandyears, and the only fear, as my new friend told me, was that someaccident might befall the pumping apparatus.
He led me to an inner chamber where I beheld a battery of twenty radiumpumps any one of which was equal to the task of furnishing all Marswith the atmosphere compound.  For eight hundred years, he told me, hehad watched these pumps which are used alternately a day each at astretch, or a little over twenty-four and one-half Earth hours.  He hasone assistant who divides the watch with him.  Half a Martian year,about three hundred and forty-four of our days, each of these men spendalone in this huge, isolated plant.
Every red Martian is taught during earliest childhood the principles ofthe manufacture of atmosphere, but only two at one time ever hold thesecret of ingress to the great building, which, built as it is withwalls a hundred and fifty feet thick, is absolutely unassailable, eventhe roof being guarded from assault by air craft by a glass coveringfive feet thick.
The only fear they entertain of attack is from the green Martians orsome demented red man, as all Barsoomians realize that the veryexistence of every form of life of Mars is dependent upon theuninterrupted working of this plant.
One curious fact I discovered as I watched his thoughts was that theouter doors are manipulated by telepathic means.  The locks are sofinely adjusted that the doors are released by the action of a certaincombination of thought waves.  To experiment with my new-found toy Ithought to surprise him into revealing this combination and so I askedhim in a casual manner how he had managed to unlock the massive doorsfor me from the inner chambers of the building.  As quick as a flashthere leaped to his mind nine Martian sounds, but as quickly faded ashe answered that this was a secret he must not divulge.
From then on his manner toward me changed as though he feared that hehad been surprised into divulging his great secret, and I readsuspicion and fear in his looks and thoughts, though his words werestill fair.
Before I retired for the night he promised to give me a letter to anearby agricultural officer who would help me on my way to Zodanga,which he said, was the nearest Martian city.
"But be sure that you do not let them know you are bound for Helium asthey are at war with that country.  My assistant and I are of nocountry, we belong to all Barsoom and this talisman which we wearprotects us in all lands, even among the green men--though we do nottrust ourselves to their hands if we can avoid it," he added.
"And so good-night, my friend," he continued, "may you have a long andrestful sleep--yes, a long sleep."
And though he smiled pleasantly I saw in his thoughts the wish that hehad never admitted me, and then a picture of him standing over me inthe night, and the swift thrust of a long dagger and the half formedwords, "I am sorry, but it is for the best good of Barsoom."
As he closed the door of my chamber behind him his thoughts were cutoff from me as was the sight of him, which seemed strange to me in mylittle knowledge of thought transference.
What was I to do?  How could I escape through these mighty walls?Easily could I kill him now that I was warned, but once he was dead Icould no more escape, and with the stopping of the machinery of thegreat plant I should die with all the other inhabitants of theplanet--all, even Dejah Thoris were she not already dead.  For theothers I did not give the snap of my finger, but the thought of DejahThoris drove from my mind all desire to kill my mistaken host.
Cautiously I opened the door of my apartment and, followed by Woola,sought the inner of the great doors.  A wild scheme had come to me; Iwould attempt to force the great locks by the nine thought waves I hadread in my host's mind.
Creeping stealthily through corridor after corridor and down windingrunways which turned hither and thither I finally reached the greathall in which I had broken my long fast that morning.  Nowhere had Iseen my host, nor did I know where he kept himself by night.
I was on the point of stepping boldly out into the room when a slightnoise behind me warned me back into the shadows of a recess in thecorridor.  Dragging Woola after me I crouched low in the darkness.
Presently the old man passed close by me, and as he entered the dimlylighted chamber which I had been about to pass through I saw that heheld a long thin dagger in his hand and that he was sharpening it upona stone.  In his mind was the decision to inspect the radium pumps,which would take about thirty minutes, and then return to my bedchamber and finish me.
As he passed through the great hall and disappeared down the runwaywhich led to the pump-room, I stole stealthily from my hiding place andcrossed to the great door, the inner of the three which stood betweenme and liberty.
Concentrating my mind upon the massive lock I hurled the nine thoughtwaves against it.  In breathless expectancy I waited, when finally thegreat door moved softly toward me and slid quietly to one side.  Oneafter the other the remaining mighty portals opened at my command andWoola and I stepped forth into the darkness, free, but little betteroff than we had been before, other than that we had full stomachs.
Hastening away from the shadows of the formidable pile I made for thefirst crossroad, intending to strike the central turnpike as quickly aspossible.  This I reached about morning and entering the firstenclosure I came to I searched for some evidences of a habitation.
There were low rambling buildings of concrete barred with heavyimpassable doors, and no amount of hammering and hallooing brought anyresponse.  Weary and exhausted from sleeplessness I threw myself uponthe ground commanding Woola to stand guard.
Some time later I was awakened by his frightful growlings and opened myeyes to see three red Martians standing a short distance from us andcovering me with their rifles.
"I am unarmed and no enemy," I hastened to explain.  "I have been aprisoner among the green men and am on my way to Zodanga.  All I ask isfood and rest for myself and my calot and the proper directions forreaching my destination."
They lowered their rifles and advanced pleasantly toward me placingtheir right hands upon my left shoulder, after the manner of theircustom of salute, and asking me many questions about myself and mywanderings.  They then took me to the house of one of them which wasonly a short distance away.
The buildings I had been hammering at in the early morning wereoccupied only by stock and farm produce, the house proper standingamong a grove of enormous trees, and, like all red-Martian homes, hadbeen raised at night some forty or fifty feet from the ground on alarge round metal shaft which slid up or down within a sleeve sunk inthe ground, and was operated by a tiny radium engine in the entrancehall of the building.  Instead of bothering with bolts and bars fortheir dwellings, the red Martians simply run them up out of harm's wayduring the night.  They also have private means for lowering or raisingthem from the ground without if they wish to go away and leave them.
These brothers, with their wives and children, occupied three similarhouses on this farm.  They did no work themselves, being governmentofficers in charge.  The labor was performed by convicts, prisoners ofwar, delinquent debtors and confirmed bachelors who were too poor topay the high celibate tax which all red-Martian governments impose.
They were the personification of cordiality and hospitality and I spentseveral days with them, resting and recuperating from my long andarduous experiences.
When they had heard my story--I omitted all reference to Dejah Thorisand the old man of the atmosphere plant--they advised me to color mybody to more nearly resemble their own race and then attempt to findemployment in Zodanga, either in the army or the navy.
"The chances are small that your tale will be believed until after youhave proven your trustworthiness and won friends among the highernobles of the court.  This you can most easily do through militaryservice, as we are a warlike people on Barsoom," explained one of them,"and save our richest favors for the fighting man."
When I was ready to depart they furnished me with a small domestic bullthoat, such as is used for saddle purposes by all red Martians.  Theanimal is about the size of a horse and quite gentle, but in color andshape an exact replica of his huge and fierce cousin of the wilds.
The brothers had supplied me with a reddish oil with which I anointedmy entire body and one of them cut my hair, which had grown quite long,in the prevailing fashion of the time, square at the back and banged infront, so that I could have passed anywhere upon Barsoom as afull-fledged red Martian.  My metal and ornaments were also renewed inthe style of a Zodangan gentleman, attached to the house of Ptor, whichwas the family name of my benefactors.
They filled a little sack at my side with Zodangan money.  The mediumof exchange upon Mars is not dissimilar from our own except that thecoins are oval.  Paper money is issued by individuals as they requireit and redeemed twice yearly.  If a man issues more than he can redeem,the government pays his creditors in full and the debtor works out theamount upon the farms or in mines, which are all owned by thegovernment.  This suits everybody except the debtor as it has been adifficult thing to obtain sufficient voluntary labor to work the greatisolated farm lands of Mars, stretching as they do like narrow ribbonsfrom pole to pole, through wild stretches peopled by wild animals andwilder men.
When I mentioned my inability to repay them for their kindness to methey assured me that I would have ample opportunity if I lived longupon Barsoom, and bidding me farewell they watched me until I was outof sight upon the broad white turnpike.



CHAPTER XXI
AN AIR SCOUT FOR ZODANGA

As I proceeded on my journey toward Zodanga many strange andinteresting sights arrested my attention, and at the several farmhouses where I stopped I learned a number of new and instructive thingsconcerning the methods and manners of Barsoom.
The water which supplies the farms of Mars is collected in immenseunderground reservoirs at either pole from the melting ice caps, andpumped through long conduits to the various populated centers.  Alongeither side of these conduits, and extending their entire length, liethe cultivated districts.  These are divided into tracts of about thesame size, each tract being under the supervision of one or moregovernment officers.
Instead of flooding the surface of the fields, and thus wasting immensequantities of water by evaporation, the precious liquid is carriedunderground through a vast network of small pipes directly to the rootsof the vegetation.  The crops upon Mars are always uniform, for thereare no droughts, no rains, no high winds, and no insects, or destroyingbirds.
On this trip I tasted the first meat I had eaten since leavingEarth--large, juicy steaks and chops from the well-fed domestic animalsof the farms.  Also I enjoyed luscious fruits and vegetables, but not asingle article of food which was exactly similar to anything on Earth.Every plant and flower and vegetable and animal has been so refined byages of careful, scientific cultivation and breeding that the like ofthem on Earth dwindled into pale, gray, characterless nothingness bycomparison.
At a second stop I met some highly cultivated people of the noble classand while in conversation we chanced to speak of Helium.  One of theolder men had been there on a diplomatic mission several years beforeand spoke with regret of the conditions which seemed destined ever tokeep these two countries at war.
"Helium," he said, "rightly boasts the most beautiful women of Barsoom,and of all her treasures the wondrous daughter of Mors Kajak, DejahThoris, is the most exquisite flower.
"Why," he added, "the people really worship the ground she walks uponand since her loss on that ill-starred expedition all Helium has beendraped in mourning.
"That our ruler should have attacked the disabled fleet as it wasreturning to Helium was but another of his awful blunders which I fearwill sooner or later compel Zodanga to elevate a wiser man to hisplace."
"Even now, though our victorious armies are surrounding Helium, thepeople of Zodanga are voicing their displeasure, for the war is not apopular one, since it is not based on right or justice.  Our forcestook advantage of the absence of the principal fleet of Helium on theirsearch for the princess, and so we have been able easily to reduce thecity to a sorry plight.  It is said she will fall within the next fewpassages of the further moon."
"And what, think you, may have been the fate of the princess, DejahThoris?" I asked as casually as possible.
"She is dead," he answered.  "This much was learned from a greenwarrior recently captured by our forces in the south.  She escaped fromthe hordes of Thark with a strange creature of another world, only tofall into the hands of the Warhoons.  Their thoats were found wanderingupon the sea bottom and evidences of a bloody conflict were discoverednearby."
While this information was in no way reassuring, neither was it at allconclusive proof of the death of Dejah Thoris, and so I determined tomake every effort possible to reach Helium as quickly as I could andcarry to Tardos Mors such news of his granddaughter's possiblewhereabouts as lay in my power.
Ten days after leaving the three Ptor brothers I arrived at Zodanga.From the moment that I had come in contact with the red inhabitants ofMars I had noticed that Woola drew a great amount of unwelcomeattention to me, since the huge brute belonged to a species which isnever domesticated by the red men.  Were one to stroll down Broadwaywith a Numidian lion at his heels the effect would be somewhat similarto that which I should have produced had I entered Zodanga with Woola.
The very thought of parting with the faithful fellow caused me so greatregret and genuine sorrow that I put it off until just before wearrived at the city's gates; but then, finally, it became imperativethat we separate.  Had nothing further than my own safety or pleasurebeen at stake no argument could have prevailed upon me to turn away theone creature upon Barsoom that had never failed in a demonstration ofaffection and loyalty; but as I would willingly have offered my life inthe service of her in search of whom I was about to challenge theunknown dangers of this, to me, mysterious city, I could not permiteven Woola's life to threaten the success of my venture, much less hismomentary happiness, for I doubted not he soon would forget me.  And soI bade the poor beast an affectionate farewell, promising him, however,that if I came through my adventure in safety that in some way I shouldfind the means to search him out.
He seemed to understand me fully, and when I pointed back in thedirection of Thark he turned sorrowfully away, nor could I bear towatch him go; but resolutely set my face toward Zodanga and with atouch of heartsickness approached her frowning walls.
The letter I bore from them gained me immediate entrance to the vast,walled city.  It was still very early in the morning and the streetswere practically deserted.  The residences, raised high upon theirmetal columns, resembled huge rookeries, while the uprights themselvespresented the appearance of steel tree trunks.  The shops as a rulewere not raised from the ground nor were their doors bolted or barred,since thievery is practically unknown upon Barsoom.  Assassination isthe ever-present fear of all Barsoomians, and for this reason alonetheir homes are raised high above the ground at night, or in times ofdanger.
The Ptor brothers had given me explicit directions for reaching thepoint of the city where I could find living accommodations and be nearthe offices of the government agents to whom they had given me letters.My way led to the central square or plaza, which is a characteristic ofall Martian cities.
The plaza of Zodanga covers a square mile and is bounded by the palacesof the jeddak, the jeds, and other members of the royalty and nobilityof Zodanga, as well as by the principal public buildings, cafes, andshops.
As I was crossing the great square lost in wonder and admiration of themagnificent architecture and the gorgeous scarlet vegetation whichcarpeted the broad lawns I discovered a red Martian walking brisklytoward me from one of the avenues.  He paid not the slightest attentionto me, but as he came abreast I recognized him, and turning I placed myhand upon his shoulder, calling out:
"Kaor, Kantos Kan!"
Like lightning he wheeled and before I could so much as lower my handthe point of his long-sword was at my breast.
"Who are you?" he growled, and then as a backward leap carried me fiftyfeet from his sword he dropped the point to the ground and exclaimed,laughing,
"I do not need a better reply, there is but one man upon all Barsoomwho can bounce about like a rubber ball.  By the mother of the furthermoon, John Carter, how came you here, and have you become a Darseenthat you can change your color at will?"
"You gave me a bad half minute my friend," he continued, after I hadbriefly outlined my adventures since parting with him in the arena atWarhoon.  "Were my name and city known to the Zodangans I would shortlybe sitting on the banks of the lost sea of Korus with my revered anddeparted ancestors.  I am here in the interest of Tardos Mors, Jeddakof Helium, to discover the whereabouts of Dejah Thoris, our princess.Sab Than, prince of Zodanga, has her hidden in the city and has fallenmadly in love with her.  His father, Than Kosis, Jeddak of Zodanga, hasmade her voluntary marriage to his son the price of peace between ourcountries, but Tardos Mors will not accede to the demands and has sentword that he and his people would rather look upon the dead face oftheir princess than see her wed to any than her own choice, and thatpersonally he would prefer being engulfed in the ashes of a lost andburning Helium to joining the metal of his house with that of ThanKosis.  His reply was the deadliest affront he could have put upon ThanKosis and the Zodangans, but his people love him the more for it andhis strength in Helium is greater today than ever.
"I have been here three days," continued Kantos Kan, "but I have notyet found where Dejah Thoris is imprisoned.  Today I join the Zodangannavy as an air scout and I hope in this way to win the confidence ofSab Than, the prince, who is commander of this division of the navy,and thus learn the whereabouts of Dejah Thoris.  I am glad that you arehere, John Carter, for I know your loyalty to my princess and two of usworking together should be able to accomplish much."
The plaza was now commencing to fill with people going and coming uponthe daily activities of their duties.  The shops were opening and thecafes filling with early morning patrons.  Kantos Kan led me to one ofthese gorgeous eating places where we were served entirely bymechanical apparatus.  No hand touched the food from the time itentered the building in its raw state until it emerged hot anddelicious upon the tables before the guests, in response to thetouching of tiny buttons to indicate their desires.
After our meal, Kantos Kan took me with him to the headquarters of theair-scout squadron and introducing me to his superior asked that I beenrolled as a member of the corps.  In accordance with custom anexamination was necessary, but Kantos Kan had told me to have no fearon this score as he would attend to that part of the matter.  Heaccomplished this by taking my order for examination to the examiningofficer and representing himself as John Carter.
"This ruse will be discovered later," he cheerfully explained, "whenthey check up my weights, measurements, and other personalidentification data, but it will be several months before this is doneand our mission should be accomplished or have failed long before thattime."
The next few days were spent by Kantos Kan in teaching me theintricacies of flying and of repairing the dainty little contrivanceswhich the Martians use for this purpose.  The body of the one-man aircraft is about sixteen feet long, two feet wide and three inches thick,tapering to a point at each end.  The driver sits on top of this planeupon a seat constructed over the small, noiseless radium engine whichpropels it.  The medium of buoyancy is contained within the thin metalwalls of the body and consists of the eighth Barsoomian ray, or ray ofpropulsion, as it may be termed in view of its properties.
This ray, like the ninth ray, is unknown on Earth, but the Martianshave discovered that it is an inherent property of all light no matterfrom what source it emanates.  They have learned that it is the solareighth ray which propels the light of the sun to the various planets,and that it is the individual eighth ray of each planet which"reflects," or propels the light thus obtained out into space oncemore.  The solar eighth ray would be absorbed by the surface ofBarsoom, but the Barsoomian eighth ray, which tends to propel lightfrom Mars into space, is constantly streaming out from the planetconstituting a force of repulsion of gravity which when confined isable to lift enormous weights from the surface of the ground.
It is this ray which has enabled them to so perfect aviation thatbattle ships far outweighing anything known upon Earth sail asgracefully and lightly through the thin air of Barsoom as a toy balloonin the heavy atmosphere of Earth.
During the early years of the discovery of this ray many strangeaccidents occurred before the Martians learned to measure and controlthe wonderful power they had found.  In one instance, some nine hundredyears before, the first great battle ship to be built with eighth rayreservoirs was stored with too great a quantity of the rays and she hadsailed up from Helium with five hundred officers and men, never toreturn.
Her power of repulsion for the planet was so great that it had carriedher far into space, where she can be seen today, by the aid of powerfultelescopes, hurtling through the heavens ten thousand miles from Mars;a tiny satellite that will thus encircle Barsoom to the end of time.
The fourth day after my arrival at Zodanga I made my first flight, andas a result of it I won a promotion which included quarters in thepalace of Than Kosis.
As I rose above the city I circled several times, as I had seen KantosKan do, and then throwing my engine into top speed I raced at terrificvelocity toward the south, following one of the great waterways whichenter Zodanga from that direction.
I had traversed perhaps two hundred miles in a little less than an hourwhen I descried far below me a party of three green warriors racingmadly toward a small figure on foot which seemed to be trying to reachthe confines of one of the walled fields.
Dropping my machine rapidly toward them, and circling to the rear ofthe warriors, I soon saw that the object of their pursuit was a redMartian wearing the metal of the scout squadron to which I wasattached.  A short distance away lay his tiny flier, surrounded by thetools with which he had evidently been occupied in repairing somedamage when surprised by the green warriors.
They were now almost upon him; their flying mounts charging down on therelatively puny figure at terrific speed, while the warriors leaned lowto the right, with their great metal-shod spears.  Each seemed strivingto be the first to impale the poor Zodangan and in another moment hisfate would have been sealed had it not been for my timely arrival.
Driving my fleet air craft at high speed directly behind the warriors Isoon overtook them and without diminishing my speed I rammed the prowof my little flier between the shoulders of the nearest.  The impactsufficient to have torn through inches of solid steel, hurled thefellow's headless body into the air over the head of his thoat, whereit fell sprawling upon the moss.  The mounts of the other two warriorsturned squealing in terror, and bolted in opposite directions.
Reducing my speed I circled and came to the ground at the feet of theastonished Zodangan.  He was warm in his thanks for my timely aid andpromised that my day's work would bring the reward it merited, for itwas none other than a cousin of the jeddak of Zodanga whose life I hadsaved.
We wasted no time in talk as we knew that the warriors would surelyreturn as soon as they had gained control of their mounts.  Hasteningto his damaged machine we were bending every effort to finish theneeded repairs and had almost completed them when we saw the two greenmonsters returning at top speed from opposite sides of us.  When theyhad approached within a hundred yards their thoats again becameunmanageable and absolutely refused to advance further toward the aircraft which had frightened them.
The warriors finally dismounted and hobbling their animals advancedtoward us on foot with drawn long-swords.
I advanced to meet the larger, telling the Zodangan to do the best hecould with the other.  Finishing my man with almost no effort, as hadnow from much practice become habitual with me, I hastened to return tomy new acquaintance whom I found indeed in desperate straits.
He was wounded and down with the huge foot of his antagonist upon histhroat and the great long-sword raised to deal the final thrust.  Witha bound I cleared the fifty feet intervening between us, and withoutstretched point drove my sword completely through the body of thegreen warrior.  His sword fell, harmless, to the ground and he sanklimply upon the prostrate form of the Zodangan.
A cursory examination of the latter revealed no mortal injuries andafter a brief rest he asserted that he felt fit to attempt the returnvoyage.  He would have to pilot his own craft, however, as these frailvessels are not intended to convey but a single person.
Quickly completing the repairs we rose together into the still,cloudless Martian sky, and at great speed and without further mishapreturned to Zodanga.
As we neared the city we discovered a mighty concourse of civilians andtroops assembled upon the plain before the city.  The sky was blackwith naval vessels and private and public pleasure craft, flying longstreamers of gay-colored silks, and banners and flags of odd andpicturesque design.
My companion signaled that I slow down, and running his machine closebeside mine suggested that we approach and watch the ceremony, which,he said, was for the purpose of conferring honors on individualofficers and men for bravery and other distinguished service.  He thenunfurled a little ensign which denoted that his craft bore a member ofthe royal family of Zodanga, and together we made our way through themaze of low-lying air vessels until we hung directly over the jeddak ofZodanga and his staff.  All were mounted upon the small domestic bullthoats of the red Martians, and their trappings and ornamentation boresuch a quantity of gorgeously colored feathers that I could not but bestruck with the startling resemblance the concourse bore to a band ofthe red Indians of my own Earth.
One of the staff called the attention of Than Kosis to the presence ofmy companion above them and the ruler motioned for him to descend.  Asthey waited for the troops to move into position facing the jeddak thetwo talked earnestly together, the jeddak and his staff occasionallyglancing up at me.  I could not hear their conversation and presentlyit ceased and all dismounted, as the last body of troops had wheeledinto position before their emperor.  A member of the staff advancedtoward the troops, and calling the name of a soldier commanded him toadvance.  The officer then recited the nature of the heroic act whichhad won the approval of the jeddak, and the latter advanced and placeda metal ornament upon the left arm of the lucky man.
Ten men had been so decorated when the aide called out,
"John Carter, air scout!"
Never in my life had I been so surprised, but the habit of militarydiscipline is strong within me, and I dropped my little machine lightlyto the ground and advanced on foot as I had seen the others do.  As Ihalted before the officer, he addressed me in a voice audible to theentire assemblage of troops and spectators.
"In recognition, John Carter," he said, "of your remarkable courage andskill in defending the person of the cousin of the jeddak Than Kosisand, singlehanded, vanquishing three green warriors, it is the pleasureof our jeddak to confer on you the mark of his esteem."
Than Kosis then advanced toward me and placing an ornament upon me,said:
"My cousin has narrated the details of your wonderful achievement,which seems little short of miraculous, and if you can so well defend acousin of the jeddak how much better could you defend the person of thejeddak himself.  You are therefore appointed a padwar of The Guards andwill be quartered in my palace hereafter."
I thanked him, and at his direction joined the members of his staff.After the ceremony I returned my machine to its quarters on the roof ofthe barracks of the air-scout squadron, and with an orderly from thepalace to guide me I reported to the officer in charge of the palace.



CHAPTER XXII
I FIND DEJAH

The major-domo to whom I reported had been given instructions tostation me near the person of the jeddak, who, in time of war, isalways in great danger of assassination, as the rule that all is fairin war seems to constitute the entire ethics of Martian conflict.
He therefore escorted me immediately to the apartment in which ThanKosis then was.  The ruler was engaged in conversation with his son,Sab Than, and several courtiers of his household, and did not perceivemy entrance.
The walls of the apartment were completely hung with splendidtapestries which hid any windows or doors which may have pierced them.The room was lighted by imprisoned rays of sunshine held between theceiling proper and what appeared to be a ground-glass false ceiling afew inches below.
My guide drew aside one of the tapestries, disclosing a passage whichencircled the room, between the hangings and the walls of the chamber.Within this passage I was to remain, he said, so long as Than Kosis wasin the apartment.  When he left I was to follow.  My only duty was toguard the ruler and keep out of sight as much as possible.  I would berelieved after a period of four hours.  The major-domo then left me.
The tapestries were of a strange weaving which gave the appearance ofheavy solidity from one side, but from my hiding place I could perceiveall that took place within the room as readily as though there had beenno curtain intervening.
Scarcely had I gained my post than the tapestry at the opposite end ofthe chamber separated and four soldiers of The Guard entered,surrounding a female figure.  As they approached Than Kosis thesoldiers fell to either side and there standing before the jeddak andnot ten feet from me, her beautiful face radiant with smiles, was DejahThoris.
Sab Than, Prince of Zodanga, advanced to meet her, and hand in handthey approached close to the jeddak.  Than Kosis looked up in surprise,and, rising, saluted her.
"To what strange freak do I owe this visit from the Princess of Helium,who, two days ago, with rare consideration for my pride, assured methat she would prefer Tal Hajus, the green Thark, to my son?"
Dejah Thoris only smiled the more and with the roguish dimples playingat the corners of her mouth she made answer:
"From the beginning of time upon Barsoom it has been the prerogative ofwoman to change her mind as she listed and to dissemble in mattersconcerning her heart.  That you will forgive, Than Kosis, as has yourson.  Two days ago I was not sure of his love for me, but now I am, andI have come to beg of you to forget my rash words and to accept theassurance of the Princess of Helium that when the time comes she willwed Sab Than, Prince of Zodanga."
"I am glad that you have so decided," replied Than Kosis.  "It is farfrom my desire to push war further against the people of Helium, and,your promise shall be recorded and a proclamation to my people issuedforthwith."
"It were better, Than Kosis," interrupted Dejah Thoris, "that theproclamation wait the ending of this war.  It would look strange indeedto my people and to yours were the Princess of Helium to give herselfto her country's enemy in the midst of hostilities."
"Cannot the war be ended at once?" spoke Sab Than.  "It requires butthe word of Than Kosis to bring peace.  Say it, my father, say the wordthat will hasten my happiness, and end this unpopular strife."
"We shall see," replied Than Kosis, "how the people of Helium take topeace.  I shall at least offer it to them."
Dejah Thoris, after a few words, turned and left the apartment, stillfollowed by her guards.
Thus was the edifice of my brief dream of happiness dashed, broken, tothe ground of reality.  The woman for whom I had offered my life, andfrom whose lips I had so recently heard a declaration of love for me,had lightly forgotten my very existence and smilingly given herself tothe son of her people's most hated enemy.
Although I had heard it with my own ears I could not believe it.  Imust search out her apartments and force her to repeat the cruel truthto me alone before I would be convinced, and so I deserted my post andhastened through the passage behind the tapestries toward the door bywhich she had left the chamber.  Slipping quietly through this openingI discovered a maze of winding corridors, branching and turning inevery direction.
Running rapidly down first one and then another of them I soon becamehopelessly lost and was standing panting against a side wall when Iheard voices near me.  Apparently they were coming from the oppositeside of the partition against which I leaned and presently I made outthe tones of Dejah Thoris.  I could not hear the words but I knew thatI could not possibly be mistaken in the voice.
Moving on a few steps I discovered another passageway at the end ofwhich lay a door.  Walking boldly forward I pushed into the room onlyto find myself in a small antechamber in which were the four guards whohad accompanied her.  One of them instantly arose and accosted me,asking the nature of my business.
"I am from Than Kosis," I replied, "and wish to speak privately withDejah Thoris, Princess of Helium."
"And your order?" asked the fellow.
I did not know what he meant, but replied that I was a member of TheGuard, and without waiting for a reply from him I strode toward theopposite door of the antechamber, behind which I could hear DejahThoris conversing.
But my entrance was not to be so easily accomplished.  The guardsmanstepped before me, saying,
"No one comes from Than Kosis without carrying an order or thepassword.  You must give me one or the other before you may pass."
"The only order I require, my friend, to enter where I will, hangs atmy side," I answered, tapping my long-sword; "will you let me pass inpeace or no?"
For reply he whipped out his own sword, calling to the others to joinhim, and thus the four stood, with drawn weapons, barring my furtherprogress.
"You are not here by the order of Than Kosis," cried the one who hadfirst addressed me, "and not only shall you not enter the apartments ofthe Princess of Helium but you shall go back to Than Kosis under guardto explain this unwarranted temerity.  Throw down your sword; youcannot hope to overcome four of us," he added with a grim smile.
My reply was a quick thrust which left me but three antagonists and Ican assure you that they were worthy of my metal.  They had me backedagainst the wall in no time, fighting for my life.  Slowly I worked myway to a corner of the room where I could force them to come at me onlyone at a time, and thus we fought upward of twenty minutes; theclanging of steel on steel producing a veritable bedlam in the littleroom.
The noise had brought Dejah Thoris to the door of her apartment, andthere she stood throughout the conflict with Sola at her back peeringover her shoulder.  Her face was set and emotionless and I knew thatshe did not recognize me, nor did Sola.
Finally a lucky cut brought down a second guardsman and then, with onlytwo opposing me, I changed my tactics and rushed them down after thefashion of my fighting that had won me many a victory.  The third fellwithin ten seconds after the second, and the last lay dead upon thebloody floor a few moments later.  They were brave men and noblefighters, and it grieved me that I had been forced to kill them, but Iwould have willingly depopulated all Barsoom could I have reached theside of my Dejah Thoris in no other way.
Sheathing my bloody blade I advanced toward my Martian Princess, whostill stood mutely gazing at me without sign of recognition.
"Who are you, Zodangan?" she whispered.  "Another enemy to harass me inmy misery?"
"I am a friend," I answered, "a once cherished friend."
"No friend of Helium's princess wears that metal," she replied, "andyet the voice!  I have heard it before; it is not--it cannot be--no,for he is dead."
"It is, though, my Princess, none other than John Carter," I said.  "Doyou not recognize, even through paint and strange metal, the heart ofyour chieftain?"
As I came close to her she swayed toward me with outstretched hands,but as I reached to take her in my arms she drew back with a shudderand a little moan of misery.
"Too late, too late," she grieved.  "O my chieftain that was, and whomI thought dead, had you but returned one little hour before--but now itis too late, too late."
"What do you mean, Dejah Thoris?" I cried.  "That you would not havepromised yourself to the Zodangan prince had you known that I lived?"
"Think you, John Carter, that I would give my heart to you yesterdayand today to another?  I thought that it lay buried with your ashes inthe pits of Warhoon, and so today I have promised my body to another tosave my people from the curse of a victorious Zodangan army."
"But I am not dead, my princess.  I have come to claim you, and allZodanga cannot prevent it."
"It is too late, John Carter, my promise is given, and on Barsoom thatis final.  The ceremonies which follow later are but meaninglessformalities.  They make the fact of marriage no more certain than doesthe funeral cortege of a jeddak again place the seal of death upon him.I am as good as married, John Carter.  No longer may you call me yourprincess.  No longer are you my chieftain."
"I know but little of your customs here upon Barsoom, Dejah Thoris, butI do know that I love you, and if you meant the last words you spoke tome that day as the hordes of Warhoon were charging down upon us, noother man shall ever claim you as his bride.  You meant them then, myprincess, and you mean them still!  Say that it is true."
"I meant them, John Carter," she whispered.  "I cannot repeat them nowfor I have given myself to another.  Ah, if you had only known ourways, my friend," she continued, half to herself, "the promise wouldhave been yours long months ago, and you could have claimed me beforeall others.  It might have meant the fall of Helium, but I would havegiven my empire for my Tharkian chief."
Then aloud she said: "Do you remember the night when you offended me?You called me your princess without having asked my hand of me, andthen you boasted that you had fought for me.  You did not know, and Ishould not have been offended; I see that now.  But there was no one totell you what I could not, that upon Barsoom there are two kinds ofwomen in the cities of the red men.  The one they fight for that theymay ask them in marriage; the other kind they fight for also, but neverask their hands.  When a man has won a woman he may address her as hisprincess, or in any of the several terms which signify possession.  Youhad fought for me, but had never asked me in marriage, and so when youcalled me your princess, you see," she faltered, "I was hurt, but eventhen, John Carter, I did not repulse you, as I should have done, untilyou made it doubly worse by taunting me with having won me throughcombat."
"I do not need ask your forgiveness now, Dejah Thoris," I cried.  "Youmust know that my fault was of ignorance of your Barsoomian customs.What I failed to do, through implicit belief that my petition would bepresumptuous and unwelcome, I do now, Dejah Thoris; I ask you to be mywife, and by all the Virginian fighting blood that flows in my veinsyou shall be."
"No, John Carter, it is useless," she cried, hopelessly, "I may neverbe yours while Sab Than lives."
"You have sealed his death warrant, my princess--Sab Than dies."
"Nor that either," she hastened to explain.  "I may not wed the man whoslays my husband, even in self-defense.  It is custom.  We are ruled bycustom upon Barsoom.  It is useless, my friend.  You must bear thesorrow with me.  That at least we may share in common.  That, and thememory of the brief days among the Tharks.  You must go now, nor eversee me again.  Good-bye, my chieftain that was."
Disheartened and dejected, I withdrew from the room, but I was notentirely discouraged, nor would I admit that Dejah Thoris was lost tome until the ceremony had actually been performed.
As I wandered along the corridors, I was as absolutely lost in themazes of winding passageways as I had been before I discovered DejahThoris' apartments.
I knew that my only hope lay in escape from the city of Zodanga, forthe matter of the four dead guardsmen would have to be explained, andas I could never reach my original post without a guide, suspicionwould surely rest on me so soon as I was discovered wandering aimlesslythrough the palace.
Presently I came upon a spiral runway leading to a lower floor, andthis I followed downward for several stories until I reached thedoorway of a large apartment in which were a number of guardsmen.  Thewalls of this room were hung with transparent tapestries behind which Isecreted myself without being apprehended.
The conversation of the guardsmen was general, and awakened no interestin me until an officer entered the room and ordered four of the men torelieve the detail who were guarding the Princess of Helium.  Now, Iknew, my troubles would commence in earnest and indeed they were uponme all too soon, for it seemed that the squad had scarcely left theguardroom before one of their number burst in again breathlessly,crying that they had found their four comrades butchered in theantechamber.
In a moment the entire palace was alive with people.  Guardsmen,officers, courtiers, servants, and slaves ran helter-skelter throughthe corridors and apartments carrying messages and orders, andsearching for signs of the assassin.
This was my opportunity and slim as it appeared I grasped it, for as anumber of soldiers came hurrying past my hiding place I fell in behindthem and followed through the mazes of the palace until, in passingthrough a great hall, I saw the blessed light of day coming in througha series of larger windows.
Here I left my guides, and, slipping to the nearest window, sought foran avenue of escape.  The windows opened upon a great balcony whichoverlooked one of the broad avenues of Zodanga.  The ground was aboutthirty feet below, and at a like distance from the building was a wallfully twenty feet high, constructed of polished glass about a foot inthickness.  To a red Martian escape by this path would have appearedimpossible, but to me, with my earthly strength and agility, it seemedalready accomplished.  My only fear was in being detected beforedarkness fell, for I could not make the leap in broad daylight whilethe court below and the avenue beyond were crowded with Zodangans.
Accordingly I searched for a hiding place and finally found one byaccident, inside a huge hanging ornament which swung from the ceilingof the hall, and about ten feet from the floor.  Into the capaciousbowl-like vase I sprang with ease, and scarcely had I settled downwithin it than I heard a number of people enter the apartment.  Thegroup stopped beneath my hiding place and I could plainly overheartheir every word.
"It is the work of Heliumites," said one of the men.
"Yes, O Jeddak, but how had they access to the palace?  I could believethat even with the diligent care of your guardsmen a single enemy mightreach the inner chambers, but how a force of six or eight fighting mencould have done so unobserved is beyond me.  We shall soon know,however, for here comes the royal psychologist."
Another man now joined the group, and, after making his formalgreetings to his ruler, said:
"O mighty Jeddak, it is a strange tale I read in the dead minds of yourfaithful guardsmen.  They were felled not by a number of fighting men,but by a single opponent."
He paused to let the full weight of this announcement impress hishearers, and that his statement was scarcely credited was evidenced bythe impatient exclamation of incredulity which escaped the lips of ThanKosis.
"What manner of weird tale are you bringing me, Notan?" he cried.
"It is the truth, my Jeddak," replied the psychologist.  "In fact theimpressions were strongly marked on the brain of each of the fourguardsmen.  Their antagonist was a very tall man, wearing the metal ofone of your own guardsmen, and his fighting ability was little short ofmarvelous for he fought fair against the entire four and vanquishedthem by his surpassing skill and superhuman strength and endurance.Though he wore the metal of Zodanga, my Jeddak, such a man was neverseen before in this or any other country upon Barsoom.
"The mind of the Princess of Helium whom I have examined and questionedwas a blank to me, she has perfect control, and I could not read oneiota of it.  She said that she witnessed a portion of the encounter,and that when she looked there was but one man engaged with theguardsmen; a man whom she did not recognize as ever having seen."
"Where is my erstwhile savior?" spoke another of the party, and Irecognized the voice of the cousin of Than Kosis, whom I had rescuedfrom the green warriors.  "By the metal of my first ancestor," he wenton, "but the description fits him to perfection, especially as to hisfighting ability."
"Where is this man?" cried Than Kosis.  "Have him brought to me atonce.  What know you of him, cousin?  It seemed strange to me now thatI think upon it that there should have been such a fighting man inZodanga, of whose name, even, we were ignorant before today.  And hisname too, John Carter, who ever heard of such a name upon Barsoom!"
Word was soon brought that I was nowhere to be found, either in thepalace or at my former quarters in the barracks of the air-scoutsquadron.  Kantos Kan, they had found and questioned, but he knewnothing of my whereabouts, and as to my past, he had told them he knewas little, since he had but recently met me during our captivity amongthe Warhoons.
"Keep your eyes on this other one," commanded Than Kosis.  "He also isa stranger and likely as not they both hail from Helium, and where oneis we shall sooner or later find the other.  Quadruple the air patrol,and let every man who leaves the city by air or ground be subjected tothe closest scrutiny."
Another messenger now entered with word that I was still within thepalace walls.
"The likeness of every person who has entered or left the palacegrounds today has been carefully examined," concluded the fellow, "andnot one approaches the likeness of this new padwar of the guards, otherthan that which was recorded of him at the time he entered."
"Then we will have him shortly," commented Than Kosis contentedly, "andin the meanwhile we will repair to the apartments of the Princess ofHelium and question her in regard to the affair.  She may know morethan she cared to divulge to you, Notan.  Come."
They left the hall, and, as darkness had fallen without, I slippedlightly from my hiding place and hastened to the balcony.  Few were insight, and choosing a moment when none seemed near I sprang quickly tothe top of the glass wall and from there to the avenue beyond thepalace grounds.



CHAPTER XXIII
LOST IN THE SKY

Without effort at concealment I hastened to the vicinity of ourquarters, where I felt sure I should find Kantos Kan.  As I neared thebuilding I became more careful, as I judged, and rightly, that theplace would be guarded.  Several men in civilian metal loitered nearthe front entrance and in the rear were others.  My only means ofreaching, unseen, the upper story where our apartments were situatedwas through an adjoining building, and after considerable maneuvering Imanaged to attain the roof of a shop several doors away.
Leaping from roof to roof, I soon reached an open window in thebuilding where I hoped to find the Heliumite, and in another moment Istood in the room before him.  He was alone and showed no surprise atmy coming, saying he had expected me much earlier, as my tour of dutymust have ended some time since.
I saw that he knew nothing of the events of the day at the palace, andwhen I had enlightened him he was all excitement.  The news that DejahThoris had promised her hand to Sab Than filled him with dismay.
"It cannot be," he exclaimed.  "It is impossible!  Why no man in allHelium but would prefer death to the selling of our loved princess tothe ruling house of Zodanga.  She must have lost her mind to haveassented to such an atrocious bargain.  You, who do not know how we ofHelium love the members of our ruling house, cannot appreciate thehorror with which I contemplate such an unholy alliance."
"What can be done, John Carter?" he continued.  "You are a resourcefulman.  Can you not think of some way to save Helium from this disgrace?"
"If I can come within sword's reach of Sab Than," I answered, "I cansolve the difficulty in so far as Helium is concerned, but for personalreasons I would prefer that another struck the blow that frees DejahThoris."
Kantos Kan eyed me narrowly before he spoke.
"You love her!" he said.  "Does she know it?"
"She knows it, Kantos Kan, and repulses me only because she is promisedto Sab Than."
The splendid fellow sprang to his feet, and grasping me by the shoulderraised his sword on high, exclaiming:
"And had the choice been left to me I could not have chosen a morefitting mate for the first princess of Barsoom.  Here is my hand uponyour shoulder, John Carter, and my word that Sab Than shall go out atthe point of my sword for the sake of my love for Helium, for DejahThoris, and for you.  This very night I shall try to reach his quartersin the palace."
"How?" I asked.  "You are strongly guarded and a quadruple forcepatrols the sky."
He bent his head in thought a moment, then raised it with an air ofconfidence.
"I only need to pass these guards and I can do it," he said at last."I know a secret entrance to the palace through the pinnacle of thehighest tower.  I fell upon it by chance one day as I was passing abovethe palace on patrol duty.  In this work it is required that weinvestigate any unusual occurrence we may witness, and a face peeringfrom the pinnacle of the high tower of the palace was, to me, mostunusual.  I therefore drew near and discovered that the possessor ofthe peering face was none other than Sab Than.  He was slightly put outat being detected and commanded me to keep the matter to myself,explaining that the passage from the tower led directly to hisapartments, and was known only to him.  If I can reach the roof of thebarracks and get my machine I can be in Sab Than's quarters in fiveminutes; but how am I to escape from this building, guarded as you sayit is?"
"How well are the machine sheds at the barracks guarded?" I asked.
"There is usually but one man on duty there at night upon the roof."
"Go to the roof of this building, Kantos Kan, and wait me there."
Without stopping to explain my plans I retraced my way to the streetand hastened to the barracks.  I did not dare to enter the building,filled as it was with members of the air-scout squadron, who, in commonwith all Zodanga, were on the lookout for me.
The building was an enormous one, rearing its lofty head fully athousand feet into the air.  But few buildings in Zodanga were higherthan these barracks, though several topped it by a few hundred feet;the docks of the great battleships of the line standing some fifteenhundred feet from the ground, while the freight and passenger stationsof the merchant squadrons rose nearly as high.
It was a long climb up the face of the building, and one fraught withmuch danger, but there was no other way, and so I essayed the task.The fact that Barsoomian architecture is extremely ornate made the featmuch simpler than I had anticipated, since I found ornamental ledgesand projections which fairly formed a perfect ladder for me all the wayto the eaves of the building.  Here I met my first real obstacle.  Theeaves projected nearly twenty feet from the wall to which I clung, andthough I encircled the great building I could find no opening throughthem.
The top floor was alight, and filled with soldiers engaged in thepastimes of their kind; I could not, therefore, reach the roof throughthe building.
There was one slight, desperate chance, and that I decided I musttake--it was for Dejah Thoris, and no man has lived who would not riska thousand deaths for such as she.
Clinging to the wall with my feet and one hand, I unloosened one of thelong leather straps of my trappings at the end of which dangled a greathook by which air sailors are hung to the sides and bottoms of theircraft for various purposes of repair, and by means of which landingparties are lowered to the ground from the battleships.
I swung this hook cautiously to the roof several times before itfinally found lodgment; gently I pulled on it to strengthen its hold,but whether it would bear the weight of my body I did not know.  Itmight be barely caught upon the very outer verge of the roof, so thatas my body swung out at the end of the strap it would slip off andlaunch me to the pavement a thousand feet below.
An instant I hesitated, and then, releasing my grasp upon thesupporting ornament, I swung out into space at the end of the strap.Far below me lay the brilliantly lighted streets, the hard pavements,and death.  There was a little jerk at the top of the supporting eaves,and a nasty slipping, grating sound which turned me cold withapprehension; then the hook caught and I was safe.
Clambering quickly aloft I grasped the edge of the eaves and drewmyself to the surface of the roof above.  As I gained my feet I wasconfronted by the sentry on duty, into the muzzle of whose revolver Ifound myself looking.
"Who are you and whence came you?" he cried.
"I am an air scout, friend, and very near a dead one, for just by themerest chance I escaped falling to the avenue below," I replied.
"But how came you upon the roof, man?  No one has landed or come upfrom the building for the past hour.  Quick, explain yourself, or Icall the guard."
"Look you here, sentry, and you shall see how I came and how close ashave I had to not coming at all," I answered, turning toward the edgeof the roof, where, twenty feet below, at the end of my strap, hung allmy weapons.
The fellow, acting on impulse of curiosity, stepped to my side and tohis undoing, for as he leaned to peer over the eaves I grasped him byhis throat and his pistol arm and threw him heavily to the roof.  Theweapon dropped from his grasp, and my fingers choked off his attemptedcry for assistance.  I gagged and bound him and then hung him over theedge of the roof as I myself had hung a few moments before.  I knew itwould be morning before he would be discovered, and I needed all thetime that I could gain.
Donning my trappings and weapons I hastened to the sheds, and soon hadout both my machine and Kantos Kan's.  Making his fast behind mine Istarted my engine, and skimming over the edge of the roof I dove downinto the streets of the city far below the plane usually occupied bythe air patrol.  In less than a minute I was settling safely upon theroof of our apartment beside the astonished Kantos Kan.
I lost no time in explanation, but plunged immediately into adiscussion of our plans for the immediate future.  It was decided thatI was to try to make Helium while Kantos Kan was to enter the palaceand dispatch Sab Than.  If successful he was then to follow me.  He setmy compass for me, a clever little device which will remain steadfastlyfixed upon any given point on the surface of Barsoom, and bidding eachother farewell we rose together and sped in the direction of the palacewhich lay in the route which I must take to reach Helium.
As we neared the high tower a patrol shot down from above, throwing itspiercing searchlight full upon my craft, and a voice roared out acommand to halt, following with a shot as I paid no attention to hishail.  Kantos Kan dropped quickly into the darkness, while I rosesteadily and at terrific speed raced through the Martian sky followedby a dozen of the air-scout craft which had joined the pursuit, andlater by a swift cruiser carrying a hundred men and a battery ofrapid-fire guns.  By twisting and turning my little machine, now risingand now falling, I managed to elude their search-lights most of thetime, but I was also losing ground by these tactics, and so I decidedto hazard everything on a straight-away course and leave the result tofate and the speed of my machine.
Kantos Kan had shown me a trick of gearing, which is known only to thenavy of Helium, that greatly increased the speed of our machines, sothat I felt sure I could distance my pursuers if I could dodge theirprojectiles for a few moments.
As I sped through the air the screeching of the bullets around meconvinced me that only by a miracle could I escape, but the die wascast, and throwing on full speed I raced a straight course towardHelium.  Gradually I left my pursuers further and further behind, and Iwas just congratulating myself on my lucky escape, when a well-directedshot from the cruiser exploded at the prow of my little craft.  Theconcussion nearly capsized her, and with a sickening plunge she hurtleddownward through the dark night.
How far I fell before I regained control of the plane I do not know,but I must have been very close to the ground when I started to riseagain, as I plainly heard the squealing of animals below me.  Risingagain I scanned the heavens for my pursuers, and finally making outtheir lights far behind me, saw that they were landing, evidently insearch of me.
Not until their lights were no longer discernible did I venture toflash my little lamp upon my compass, and then I found to myconsternation that a fragment of the projectile had utterly destroyedmy only guide, as well as my speedometer.  It was true I could followthe stars in the general direction of Helium, but without knowing theexact location of the city or the speed at which I was traveling mychances for finding it were slim.
Helium lies a thousand miles southwest of Zodanga, and with my compassintact I should have made the trip, barring accidents, in between fourand five hours.  As it turned out, however, morning found me speedingover a vast expanse of dead sea bottom after nearly six hours ofcontinuous flight at high speed.  Presently a great city showed belowme, but it was not Helium, as that alone of all Barsoomian metropolisesconsists in two immense circular walled cities about seventy-five milesapart and would have been easily distinguishable from the altitude atwhich I was flying.
Believing that I had come too far to the north and west, I turned backin a southeasterly direction, passing during the forenoon several otherlarge cities, but none resembling the description which Kantos Kan hadgiven me of Helium.  In addition to the twin-city formation of Helium,another distinguishing feature is the two immense towers, one of vividscarlet rising nearly a mile into the air from the center of one of thecities, while the other, of bright yellow and of the same height, marksher sister.



CHAPTER XXIV
TARS TARKAS FINDS A FRIEND

About noon I passed low over a great dead city of ancient Mars, and asI skimmed out across the plain beyond I came full upon several thousandgreen warriors engaged in a terrific battle.  Scarcely had I seen themthan a volley of shots was directed at me, and with the almostunfailing accuracy of their aim my little craft was instantly a ruinedwreck, sinking erratically to the ground.
I fell almost directly in the center of the fierce combat, amongwarriors who had not seen my approach so busily were they engaged inlife and death struggles.  The men were fighting on foot withlong-swords, while an occasional shot from a sharpshooter on theoutskirts of the conflict would bring down a warrior who might for aninstant separate himself from the entangled mass.
As my machine sank among them I realized that it was fight or die, withgood chances of dying in any event, and so I struck the ground withdrawn long-sword ready to defend myself as I could.
I fell beside a huge monster who was engaged with three antagonists,and as I glanced at his fierce face, filled with the light of battle, Irecognized Tars Tarkas the Thark.  He did not see me, as I was a triflebehind him, and just then the three warriors opposing him, and whom Irecognized as Warhoons, charged simultaneously.  The mighty fellow madequick work of one of them, but in stepping back for another thrust hefell over a dead body behind him and was down and at the mercy of hisfoes in an instant.  Quick as lightning they were upon him, and TarsTarkas would have been gathered to his fathers in short order had I notsprung before his prostrate form and engaged his adversaries.  I hadaccounted for one of them when the mighty Thark regained his feet andquickly settled the other.
He gave me one look, and a slight smile touched his grim lip as,touching my shoulder, he said,
"I would scarcely recognize you, John Carter, but there is no othermortal upon Barsoom who would have done what you have for me.  I thinkI have learned that there is such a thing as friendship, my friend."
He said no more, nor was there opportunity, for the Warhoons wereclosing in about us, and together we fought, shoulder to shoulder,during all that long, hot afternoon, until the tide of battle turnedand the remnant of the fierce Warhoon horde fell back upon theirthoats, and fled into the gathering darkness.
Ten thousand men had been engaged in that titanic struggle, and uponthe field of battle lay three thousand dead.  Neither side asked orgave quarter, nor did they attempt to take prisoners.
On our return to the city after the battle we had gone directly to TarsTarkas' quarters, where I was left alone while the chieftain attendedthe customary council which immediately follows an engagement.
As I sat awaiting the return of the green warrior I heard somethingmove in an adjoining apartment, and as I glanced up there rushedsuddenly upon me a huge and hideous creature which bore me backwardupon the pile of silks and furs upon which I had been reclining.  Itwas Woola--faithful, loving Woola.  He had found his way back to Tharkand, as Tars Tarkas later told me, had gone immediately to my formerquarters where he had taken up his pathetic and seemingly hopelesswatch for my return.
"Tal Hajus knows that you are here, John Carter," said Tars Tarkas, onhis return from the jeddak's quarters; "Sarkoja saw and recognized youas we were returning.  Tal Hajus has ordered me to bring you before himtonight.  I have ten thoats, John Carter; you may take your choice fromamong them, and I will accompany you to the nearest waterway that leadsto Helium.  Tars Tarkas may be a cruel green warrior, but he can be afriend as well.  Come, we must start."
"And when you return, Tars Tarkas?" I asked.
"The wild calots, possibly, or worse," he replied.  "Unless I shouldchance to have the opportunity I have so long waited of battling withTal Hajus."
"We will stay, Tars Tarkas, and see Tal Hajus tonight.  You shall notsacrifice yourself, and it may be that tonight you can have the chanceyou wait."
He objected strenuously, saying that Tal Hajus often flew into wildfits of passion at the mere thought of the blow I had dealt him, andthat if ever he laid his hands upon me I would be subjected to the mosthorrible tortures.
While we were eating I repeated to Tars Tarkas the story which Sola hadtold me that night upon the sea bottom during the march to Thark.
He said but little, but the great muscles of his face worked in passionand in agony at recollection of the horrors which had been heaped uponthe only thing he had ever loved in all his cold, cruel, terribleexistence.
He no longer demurred when I suggested that we go before Tal Hajus,only saying that he would like to speak to Sarkoja first.  At hisrequest I accompanied him to her quarters, and the look of venomoushatred she cast upon me was almost adequate recompense for any futuremisfortunes this accidental return to Thark might bring me.
"Sarkoja," said Tars Tarkas, "forty years ago you were instrumental inbringing about the torture and death of a woman named Gozava.  I havejust discovered that the warrior who loved that woman has learned ofyour part in the transaction.  He may not kill you, Sarkoja, it is notour custom, but there is nothing to prevent him tying one end of astrap about your neck and the other end to a wild thoat, merely to testyour fitness to survive and help perpetuate our race.  Having heardthat he would do this on the morrow, I thought it only right to warnyou, for I am a just man.  The river Iss is but a short pilgrimage,Sarkoja.  Come, John Carter."
The next morning Sarkoja was gone, nor was she ever seen after.
In silence we hastened to the jeddak's palace, where we wereimmediately admitted to his presence; in fact, he could scarcely waitto see me and was standing erect upon his platform glowering at theentrance as I came in.
"Strap him to that pillar," he shrieked.  "We shall see who it is daresstrike the mighty Tal Hajus.  Heat the irons; with my own hands I shallburn the eyes from his head that he may not pollute my person with hisvile gaze."
"Chieftains of Thark," I cried, turning to the assembled council andignoring Tal Hajus, "I have been a chief among you, and today I havefought for Thark shoulder to shoulder with her greatest warrior.  Youowe me, at least, a hearing.  I have won that much today.  You claim tobe just people--"
"Silence," roared Tal Hajus.  "Gag the creature and bind him as Icommand."
"Justice, Tal Hajus," exclaimed Lorquas Ptomel.  "Who are you to setaside the customs of ages among the Tharks."
"Yes, justice!" echoed a dozen voices, and so, while Tal Hajus fumedand frothed, I continued.
"You are a brave people and you love bravery, but where was your mightyjeddak during the fighting today?  I did not see him in the thick ofbattle; he was not there.  He rends defenseless women and littlechildren in his lair, but how recently has one of you seen him fightwith men?  Why, even I, a midget beside him, felled him with a singleblow of my fist.  Is it of such that the Tharks fashion their jeddaks?There stands beside me now a great Thark, a mighty warrior and a nobleman.  Chieftains, how sounds, Tars Tarkas, Jeddak of Thark?"
A roar of deep-toned applause greeted this suggestion.
"It but remains for this council to command, and Tal Hajus must provehis fitness to rule.  Were he a brave man he would invite Tars Tarkasto combat, for he does not love him, but Tal Hajus is afraid; TalHajus, your jeddak, is a coward.  With my bare hands I could kill him,and he knows it."
After I ceased there was tense silence, as all eyes were riveted uponTal Hajus.  He did not speak or move, but the blotchy green of hiscountenance turned livid, and the froth froze upon his lips.
"Tal Hajus," said Lorquas Ptomel in a cold, hard voice, "never in mylong life have I seen a jeddak of the Tharks so humiliated.  Therecould be but one answer to this arraignment.  We wait it."  And stillTal Hajus stood as though electrified.
"Chieftains," continued Lorquas Ptomel, "shall the jeddak, Tal Hajus,prove his fitness to rule over Tars Tarkas?"
There were twenty chieftains about the rostrum, and twenty swordsflashed high in assent.
There was no alternative.  That decree was final, and so Tal Hajus drewhis long-sword and advanced to meet Tars Tarkas.
The combat was soon over, and, with his foot upon the neck of the deadmonster, Tars Tarkas became jeddak among the Tharks.
His first act was to make me a full-fledged chieftain with the rank Ihad won by my combats the first few weeks of my captivity among them.
Seeing the favorable disposition of the warriors toward Tars Tarkas, aswell as toward me, I grasped the opportunity to enlist them in my causeagainst Zodanga.  I told Tars Tarkas the story of my adventures, and ina few words had explained to him the thought I had in mind.
"John Carter has made a proposal," he said, addressing the council,"which meets with my sanction.  I shall put it to you briefly.  DejahThoris, the Princess of Helium, who was our prisoner, is now held bythe jeddak of Zodanga, whose son she must wed to save her country fromdevastation at the hands of the Zodangan forces.
"John Carter suggests that we rescue her and return her to Helium.  Theloot of Zodanga would be magnificent, and I have often thought that hadwe an alliance with the people of Helium we could obtain sufficientassurance of sustenance to permit us to increase the size and frequencyof our hatchings, and thus become unquestionably supreme among thegreen men of all Barsoom.  What say you?"
It was a chance to fight, an opportunity to loot, and they rose to thebait as a speckled trout to a fly.
For Tharks they were wildly enthusiastic, and before another half hourhad passed twenty mounted messengers were speeding across dead seabottoms to call the hordes together for the expedition.
In three days we were on the march toward Zodanga, one hundred thousandstrong, as Tars Tarkas had been able to enlist the services of threesmaller hordes on the promise of the great loot of Zodanga.
At the head of the column I rode beside the great Thark while at theheels of my mount trotted my beloved Woola.
We traveled entirely by night, timing our marches so that we campedduring the day at deserted cities where, even to the beasts, we wereall kept indoors during the daylight hours.  On the march Tars Tarkas,through his remarkable ability and statesmanship, enlisted fiftythousand more warriors from various hordes, so that, ten days after weset out we halted at midnight outside the great walled city of Zodanga,one hundred and fifty thousand strong.
The fighting strength and efficiency of this horde of ferocious greenmonsters was equivalent to ten times their number of red men.  Never inthe history of Barsoom, Tars Tarkas told me, had such a force of greenwarriors marched to battle together.  It was a monstrous task to keepeven a semblance of harmony among them, and it was a marvel to me thathe got them to the city without a mighty battle among themselves.
But as we neared Zodanga their personal quarrels were submerged bytheir greater hatred for the red men, and especially for the Zodangans,who had for years waged a ruthless campaign of extermination againstthe green men, directing special attention toward despoiling theirincubators.
Now that we were before Zodanga the task of obtaining entry to the citydevolved upon me, and directing Tars Tarkas to hold his forces in twodivisions out of earshot of the city, with each division opposite alarge gateway, I took twenty dismounted warriors and approached one ofthe small gates that pierced the walls at short intervals.  These gateshave no regular guard, but are covered by sentries, who patrol theavenue that encircles the city just within the walls as ourmetropolitan police patrol their beats.
The walls of Zodanga are seventy-five feet in height and fifty feetthick.  They are built of enormous blocks of carborundum, and the taskof entering the city seemed, to my escort of green warriors, animpossibility.  The fellows who had been detailed to accompany me wereof one of the smaller hordes, and therefore did not know me.
Placing three of them with their faces to the wall and arms locked, Icommanded two more to mount to their shoulders, and a sixth I orderedto climb upon the shoulders of the upper two.  The head of the topmostwarrior towered over forty feet from the ground.
In this way, with ten warriors, I built a series of three steps fromthe ground to the shoulders of the topmost man.  Then starting from ashort distance behind them I ran swiftly up from one tier to the next,and with a final bound from the broad shoulders of the highest Iclutched the top of the great wall and quietly drew myself to its broadexpanse.  After me I dragged six lengths of leather from an equalnumber of my warriors.  These lengths we had previously fastenedtogether, and passing one end to the topmost warrior I lowered theother end cautiously over the opposite side of the wall toward theavenue below.  No one was in sight, so, lowering myself to the end ofmy leather strap, I dropped the remaining thirty feet to the pavementbelow.
I had learned from Kantos Kan the secret of opening these gates, and inanother moment my twenty great fighting men stood within the doomedcity of Zodanga.
I found to my delight that I had entered at the lower boundary of theenormous palace grounds.  The building itself showed in the distance ablaze of glorious light, and on the instant I determined to lead adetachment of warriors directly within the palace itself, while thebalance of the great horde was attacking the barracks of the soldiery.
Dispatching one of my men to Tars Tarkas for a detail of fifty Tharks,with word of my intentions, I ordered ten warriors to capture and openone of the great gates while with the nine remaining I took the other.We were to do our work quietly, no shots were to be fired and nogeneral advance made until I had reached the palace with my fiftyTharks.  Our plans worked to perfection.  The two sentries we met weredispatched to their fathers upon the banks of the lost sea of Korus,and the guards at both gates followed them in silence.



CHAPTER XXV
THE LOOTING OF ZODANGA

As the great gate where I stood swung open my fifty Tharks, headed byTars Tarkas himself, rode in upon their mighty thoats.  I led them tothe palace walls, which I negotiated easily without assistance.  Onceinside, however, the gate gave me considerable trouble, but I finallywas rewarded by seeing it swing upon its huge hinges, and soon myfierce escort was riding across the gardens of the jeddak of Zodanga.
As we approached the palace I could see through the great windows ofthe first floor into the brilliantly illuminated audience chamber ofThan Kosis.  The immense hall was crowded with nobles and their women,as though some important function was in progress.  There was not aguard in sight without the palace, due, I presume, to the fact that thecity and palace walls were considered impregnable, and so I came closeand peered within.
At one end of the chamber, upon massive golden thrones encrusted withdiamonds, sat Than Kosis and his consort, surrounded by officers anddignitaries of state.  Before them stretched a broad aisle lined oneither side with soldiery, and as I looked there entered this aisle atthe far end of the hall, the head of a procession which advanced to thefoot of the throne.
First there marched four officers of the jeddak's Guard bearing a hugesalver on which reposed, upon a cushion of scarlet silk, a great goldenchain with a collar and padlock at each end.  Directly behind theseofficers came four others carrying a similar salver which supported themagnificent ornaments of a prince and princess of the reigning house ofZodanga.
At the foot of the throne these two parties separated and halted,facing each other at opposite sides of the aisle.  Then came moredignitaries, and the officers of the palace and of the army, andfinally two figures entirely muffled in scarlet silk, so that not afeature of either was discernible.  These two stopped at the foot ofthe throne, facing Than Kosis.  When the balance of the procession hadentered and assumed their stations Than Kosis addressed the couplestanding before him.  I could not hear his words, but presently twoofficers advanced and removed the scarlet robe from one of the figures,and I saw that Kantos Kan had failed in his mission, for it was SabThan, Prince of Zodanga, who stood revealed before me.
Than Kosis now took a set of the ornaments from one of the salvers andplaced one of the collars of gold about his son's neck, springing thepadlock fast.  After a few more words addressed to Sab Than he turnedto the other figure, from which the officers now removed theenshrouding silks, disclosing to my now comprehending view DejahThoris, Princess of Helium.
The object of the ceremony was clear to me; in another moment DejahThoris would be joined forever to the Prince of Zodanga.  It was animpressive and beautiful ceremony, I presume, but to me it seemed themost fiendish sight I had ever witnessed, and as the ornaments wereadjusted upon her beautiful figure and her collar of gold swung open inthe hands of Than Kosis I raised my long-sword above my head, and, withthe heavy hilt, I shattered the glass of the great window and spranginto the midst of the astonished assemblage.  With a bound I was on thesteps of the platform beside Than Kosis, and as he stood riveted withsurprise I brought my long-sword down upon the golden chain that wouldhave bound Dejah Thoris to another.
In an instant all was confusion; a thousand drawn swords menaced mefrom every quarter, and Sab Than sprang upon me with a jeweled daggerhe had drawn from his nuptial ornaments.  I could have killed him aseasily as I might a fly, but the age-old custom of Barsoom stayed myhand, and grasping his wrist as the dagger flew toward my heart I heldhim as though in a vise and with my long-sword pointed to the far endof the hall.
"Zodanga has fallen," I cried.  "Look!"
All eyes turned in the direction I had indicated, and there, forgingthrough the portals of the entranceway rode Tars Tarkas and his fiftywarriors on their great thoats.
A cry of alarm and amazement broke from the assemblage, but no word offear, and in a moment the soldiers and nobles of Zodanga were hurlingthemselves upon the advancing Tharks.
Thrusting Sab Than headlong from the platform, I drew Dejah Thoris tomy side.  Behind the throne was a narrow doorway and in this Than Kosisnow stood facing me, with drawn long-sword.  In an instant we wereengaged, and I found no mean antagonist.
As we circled upon the broad platform I saw Sab Than rushing up thesteps to aid his father, but, as he raised his hand to strike, DejahThoris sprang before him and then my sword found the spot that made SabThan jeddak of Zodanga.  As his father rolled dead upon the floor thenew jeddak tore himself free from Dejah Thoris' grasp, and again wefaced each other.  He was soon joined by a quartet of officers, and,with my back against a golden throne, I fought once again for DejahThoris.  I was hard pressed to defend myself and yet not strike downSab Than and, with him, my last chance to win the woman I loved.  Myblade was swinging with the rapidity of lightning as I sought to parrythe thrusts and cuts of my opponents.  Two I had disarmed, and one wasdown, when several more rushed to the aid of their new ruler, and toavenge the death of the old.
As they advanced there were cries of "The woman!  The woman!  Strikeher down; it is her plot.  Kill her!  Kill her!"
Calling to Dejah Thoris to get behind me I worked my way toward thelittle doorway back of the throne, but the officers realized myintentions, and three of them sprang in behind me and blocked mychances for gaining a position where I could have defended Dejah Thorisagainst any army of swordsmen.
The Tharks were having their hands full in the center of the room, andI began to realize that nothing short of a miracle could save DejahThoris and myself, when I saw Tars Tarkas surging through the crowd ofpygmies that swarmed about him.  With one swing of his mighty longswordhe laid a dozen corpses at his feet, and so he hewed a pathway beforehim until in another moment he stood upon the platform beside me,dealing death and destruction right and left.
The bravery of the Zodangans was awe-inspiring, not one attempted toescape, and when the fighting ceased it was because only Tharksremained alive in the great hall, other than Dejah Thoris and myself.
Sab Than lay dead beside his father, and the corpses of the flower ofZodangan nobility and chivalry covered the floor of the bloody shambles.
My first thought when the battle was over was for Kantos Kan, andleaving Dejah Thoris in charge of Tars Tarkas I took a dozen warriorsand hastened to the dungeons beneath the palace.  The jailers had allleft to join the fighters in the throne room, so we searched thelabyrinthine prison without opposition.
I called Kantos Kan's name aloud in each new corridor and compartment,and finally I was rewarded by hearing a faint response.  Guided by thesound, we soon found him helpless in a dark recess.
He was overjoyed at seeing me, and to know the meaning of the fight,faint echoes of which had reached his prison cell.  He told me that theair patrol had captured him before he reached the high tower of thepalace, so that he had not even seen Sab Than.
We discovered that it would be futile to attempt to cut away the barsand chains which held him prisoner, so, at his suggestion I returned tosearch the bodies on the floor above for keys to open the padlocks ofhis cell and of his chains.
Fortunately among the first I examined I found his jailer, and soon wehad Kantos Kan with us in the throne room.
The sounds of heavy firing, mingled with shouts and cries, came to usfrom the city's streets, and Tars Tarkas hastened away to direct thefighting without.  Kantos Kan accompanied him to act as guide, thegreen warriors commencing a thorough search of the palace for otherZodangans and for loot, and Dejah Thoris and I were left alone.
She had sunk into one of the golden thrones, and as I turned to her shegreeted me with a wan smile.
"Was there ever such a man!" she exclaimed.  "I know that Barsoom hasnever before seen your like.  Can it be that all Earth men are as you?Alone, a stranger, hunted, threatened, persecuted, you have done in afew short months what in all the past ages of Barsoom no man has everdone: joined together the wild hordes of the sea bottoms and broughtthem to fight as allies of a red Martian people."
"The answer is easy, Dejah Thoris," I replied smiling.  "It was not Iwho did it, it was love, love for Dejah Thoris, a power that would workgreater miracles than this you have seen."
A pretty flush overspread her face and she answered,
"You may say that now, John Carter, and I may listen, for I am free."
"And more still I have to say, ere it is again too late," I returned."I have done many strange things in my life, many things that wiser menwould not have dared, but never in my wildest fancies have I dreamed ofwinning a Dejah Thoris for myself--for never had I dreamed that in allthe universe dwelt such a woman as the Princess of Helium.  That youare a princess does not abash me, but that you are you is enough tomake me doubt my sanity as I ask you, my princess, to be mine."
"He does not need to be abashed who so well knew the answer to his pleabefore the plea were made," she replied, rising and placing her dearhands upon my shoulders, and so I took her in my arms and kissed her.
And thus in the midst of a city of wild conflict, filled with thealarms of war; with death and destruction reaping their terribleharvest around her, did Dejah Thoris, Princess of Helium, true daughterof Mars, the God of War, promise herself in marriage to John Carter,Gentleman of Virginia.



CHAPTER XXVI
THROUGH CARNAGE TO JOY

Sometime later Tars Tarkas and Kantos Kan returned to report thatZodanga had been completely reduced.  Her forces were entirelydestroyed or captured, and no further resistance was to be expectedfrom within.  Several battleships had escaped, but there were thousandsof war and merchant vessels under guard of Thark warriors.
The lesser hordes had commenced looting and quarreling amongthemselves, so it was decided that we collect what warriors we could,man as many vessels as possible with Zodangan prisoners and make forHelium without further loss of time.
Five hours later we sailed from the roofs of the dock buildings with afleet of two hundred and fifty battleships, carrying nearly one hundredthousand green warriors, followed by a fleet of transports with ourthoats.
Behind us we left the stricken city in the fierce and brutal clutchesof some forty thousand green warriors of the lesser hordes.  They werelooting, murdering, and fighting amongst themselves.  In a hundredplaces they had applied the torch, and columns of dense smoke wererising above the city as though to blot out from the eye of heaven thehorrid sights beneath.
In the middle of the afternoon we sighted the scarlet and yellow towersof Helium, and a short time later a great fleet of Zodangan battleshipsrose from the camps of the besiegers without the city, and advanced tomeet us.
The banners of Helium had been strung from stem to stern of each of ourmighty craft, but the Zodangans did not need this sign to realize thatwe were enemies, for our green Martian warriors had opened fire uponthem almost as they left the ground.  With their uncanny marksmanshipthey raked the on-coming fleet with volley after volley.
The twin cities of Helium, perceiving that we were friends, sent outhundreds of vessels to aid us, and then began the first real air battleI had ever witnessed.
The vessels carrying our green warriors were kept circling above thecontending fleets of Helium and Zodanga, since their batteries wereuseless in the hands of the Tharks who, having no navy, have no skillin naval gunnery.  Their small-arm fire, however, was most effective,and the final outcome of the engagement was strongly influenced, if notwholly determined, by their presence.
At first the two forces circled at the same altitude, pouring broadsideafter broadside into each other.  Presently a great hole was torn inthe hull of one of the immense battle craft from the Zodangan camp;with a lurch she turned completely over, the little figures of her crewplunging, turning and twisting toward the ground a thousand feet below;then with sickening velocity she tore after them, almost completelyburying herself in the soft loam of the ancient sea bottom.
A wild cry of exultation arose from the Heliumite squadron, and withredoubled ferocity they fell upon the Zodangan fleet.  By a prettymaneuver two of the vessels of Helium gained a position above theiradversaries, from which they poured upon them from their keel bombbatteries a perfect torrent of exploding bombs.
Then, one by one, the battleships of Helium succeeded in rising abovethe Zodangans, and in a short time a number of the beleagueringbattleships were drifting hopeless wrecks toward the high scarlet towerof greater Helium.  Several others attempted to escape, but they weresoon surrounded by thousands of tiny individual fliers, and above eachhung a monster battleship of Helium ready to drop boarding parties upontheir decks.
Within but little more than an hour from the moment the victoriousZodangan squadron had risen to meet us from the camp of the besiegersthe battle was over, and the remaining vessels of the conqueredZodangans were headed toward the cities of Helium under prize crews.
There was an extremely pathetic side to the surrender of these mightyfliers, the result of an age-old custom which demanded that surrendershould be signalized by the voluntary plunging to earth of thecommander of the vanquished vessel.  One after another the bravefellows, holding their colors high above their heads, leaped from thetowering bows of their mighty craft to an awful death.
Not until the commander of the entire fleet took the fearful plunge,thus indicating the surrender of the remaining vessels, did thefighting cease, and the useless sacrifice of brave men come to an end.
We now signaled the flagship of Helium's navy to approach, and when shewas within hailing distance I called out that we had the Princess DejahThoris on board, and that we wished to transfer her to the flagshipthat she might be taken immediately to the city.
As the full import of my announcement bore in upon them a great cryarose from the decks of the flagship, and a moment later the colors ofthe Princess of Helium broke from a hundred points upon her upperworks.  When the other vessels of the squadron caught the meaning ofthe signals flashed them they took up the wild acclaim and unfurled hercolors in the gleaming sunlight.
The flagship bore down upon us, and as she swung gracefully to andtouched our side a dozen officers sprang upon our decks.  As theirastonished gaze fell upon the hundreds of green warriors, who now cameforth from the fighting shelters, they stopped aghast, but at sight ofKantos Kan, who advanced to meet them, they came forward, crowdingabout him.
Dejah Thoris and I then advanced, and they had no eyes for other thanher.  She received them gracefully, calling each by name, for they weremen high in the esteem and service of her grandfather, and she knewthem well.
"Lay your hands upon the shoulder of John Carter," she said to them,turning toward me, "the man to whom Helium owes her princess as well asher victory today."
They were very courteous to me and said many kind and complimentarythings, but what seemed to impress them most was that I had won the aidof the fierce Tharks in my campaign for the liberation of Dejah Thoris,and the relief of Helium.
"You owe your thanks more to another man than to me," I said, "and herehe is; meet one of Barsoom's greatest soldiers and statesmen, TarsTarkas, Jeddak of Thark."
With the same polished courtesy that had marked their manner toward methey extended their greetings to the great Thark, nor, to my surprise,was he much behind them in ease of bearing or in courtly speech.Though not a garrulous race, the Tharks are extremely formal, and theirways lend themselves amazingly well to dignified and courtly manners.
Dejah Thoris went aboard the flagship, and was much put out that Iwould not follow, but, as I explained to her, the battle was but partlywon; we still had the land forces of the besieging Zodangans to accountfor, and I would not leave Tars Tarkas until that had been accomplished.
The commander of the naval forces of Helium promised to arrange to havethe armies of Helium attack from the city in conjunction with our landattack, and so the vessels separated and Dejah Thoris was borne intriumph back to the court of her grandfather, Tardos Mors, Jeddak ofHelium.
In the distance lay our fleet of transports, with the thoats of thegreen warriors, where they had remained during the battle.  Withoutlanding stages it was to be a difficult matter to unload these beastsupon the open plain, but there was nothing else for it, and so we putout for a point about ten miles from the city and began the task.
It was necessary to lower the animals to the ground in slings and thiswork occupied the remainder of the day and half the night.  Twice wewere attacked by parties of Zodangan cavalry, but with little loss,however, and after darkness shut down they withdrew.
As soon as the last thoat was unloaded Tars Tarkas gave the command toadvance, and in three parties we crept upon the Zodangan camp from thenorth, the south and the east.
About a mile from the main camp we encountered their outposts and, ashad been prearranged, accepted this as the signal to charge.  Withwild, ferocious cries and amidst the nasty squealing of battle-enragedthoats we bore down upon the Zodangans.
We did not catch them napping, but found a well-entrenched battle lineconfronting us.  Time after time we were repulsed until, toward noon, Ibegan to fear for the result of the battle.
The Zodangans numbered nearly a million fighting men, gathered frompole to pole, wherever stretched their ribbon-like waterways, whilepitted against them were less than a hundred thousand green warriors.The forces from Helium had not arrived, nor could we receive any wordfrom them.
Just at noon we heard heavy firing all along the line between theZodangans and the cities, and we knew then that our much-neededreinforcements had come.
Again Tars Tarkas ordered the charge, and once more the mighty thoatsbore their terrible riders against the ramparts of the enemy.  At thesame moment the battle line of Helium surged over the oppositebreastworks of the Zodangans and in another moment they were beingcrushed as between two millstones.  Nobly they fought, but in vain.
The plain before the city became a veritable shambles ere the lastZodangan surrendered, but finally the carnage ceased, the prisonerswere marched back to Helium, and we entered the greater city's gates, ahuge triumphal procession of conquering heroes.
The broad avenues were lined with women and children, among which werethe few men whose duties necessitated that they remain within the cityduring the battle.  We were greeted with an endless round of applauseand showered with ornaments of gold, platinum, silver, and preciousjewels.  The city had gone mad with joy.
My fierce Tharks caused the wildest excitement and enthusiasm.  Neverbefore had an armed body of green warriors entered the gates of Helium,and that they came now as friends and allies filled the red men withrejoicing.
That my poor services to Dejah Thoris had become known to theHeliumites was evidenced by the loud crying of my name, and by theloads of ornaments that were fastened upon me and my huge thoat as wepassed up the avenues to the palace, for even in the face of theferocious appearance of Woola the populace pressed close about me.
As we approached this magnificent pile we were met by a party ofofficers who greeted us warmly and requested that Tars Tarkas and hisjeds with the jeddaks and jeds of his wild allies, together withmyself, dismount and accompany them to receive from Tardos Mors anexpression of his gratitude for our services.
At the top of the great steps leading up to the main portals of thepalace stood the royal party, and as we reached the lower steps one oftheir number descended to meet us.
He was an almost perfect specimen of manhood; tall, straight as anarrow, superbly muscled and with the carriage and bearing of a ruler ofmen.  I did not need to be told that he was Tardos Mors, Jeddak ofHelium.
The first member of our party he met was Tars Tarkas and his firstwords sealed forever the new friendship between the races.
"That Tardos Mors," he said, earnestly, "may meet the greatest livingwarrior of Barsoom is a priceless honor, but that he may lay his handon the shoulder of a friend and ally is a far greater boon."
"Jeddak of Helium," returned Tars Tarkas, "it has remained for a man ofanother world to teach the green warriors of Barsoom the meaning offriendship; to him we owe the fact that the hordes of Thark canunderstand you; that they can appreciate and reciprocate the sentimentsso graciously expressed."
Tardos Mors then greeted each of the green jeddaks and jeds, and toeach spoke words of friendship and appreciation.
As he approached me he laid both hands upon my shoulders.
"Welcome, my son," he said; "that you are granted, gladly, and withoutone word of opposition, the most precious jewel in all Helium, yes, onall Barsoom, is sufficient earnest of my esteem."
We were then presented to Mors Kajak, Jed of lesser Helium, and fatherof Dejah Thoris.  He had followed close behind Tardos Mors and seemedeven more affected by the meeting than had his father.
He tried a dozen times to express his gratitude to me, but his voicechoked with emotion and he could not speak, and yet he had, as I was tolater learn, a reputation for ferocity and fearlessness as a fighterthat was remarkable even upon warlike Barsoom.  In common with allHelium he worshiped his daughter, nor could he think of what she hadescaped without deep emotion.



CHAPTER XXVII
FROM JOY TO DEATH

For ten days the hordes of Thark and their wild allies were feasted andentertained, and, then, loaded with costly presents and escorted by tenthousand soldiers of Helium commanded by Mors Kajak, they started onthe return journey to their own lands.  The jed of lesser Helium with asmall party of nobles accompanied them all the way to Thark to cementmore closely the new bonds of peace and friendship.
Sola also accompanied Tars Tarkas, her father, who before all hischieftains had acknowledged her as his daughter.
Three weeks later, Mors Kajak and his officers, accompanied by TarsTarkas and Sola, returned upon a battleship that had been dispatched toThark to fetch them in time for the ceremony which made Dejah Thorisand John Carter one.
For nine years I served in the councils and fought in the armies ofHelium as a prince of the house of Tardos Mors.  The people seemednever to tire of heaping honors upon me, and no day passed that did notbring some new proof of their love for my princess, the incomparableDejah Thoris.
In a golden incubator upon the roof of our palace lay a snow-white egg.For nearly five years ten soldiers of the jeddak's Guard had constantlystood over it, and not a day passed when I was in the city that DejahThoris and I did not stand hand in hand before our little shrineplanning for the future, when the delicate shell should break.
Vivid in my memory is the picture of the last night as we sat theretalking in low tones of the strange romance which had woven our livestogether and of this wonder which was coming to augment our happinessand fulfill our hopes.
In the distance we saw the bright-white light of an approachingairship, but we attached no special significance to so common a sight.Like a bolt of lightning it raced toward Helium until its very speedbespoke the unusual.
Flashing the signals which proclaimed it a dispatch bearer for thejeddak, it circled impatiently awaiting the tardy patrol boat whichmust convoy it to the palace docks.
Ten minutes after it touched at the palace a message called me to thecouncil chamber, which I found filling with the members of that body.
On the raised platform of the throne was Tardos Mors, pacing back andforth with tense-drawn face.  When all were in their seats he turnedtoward us.
"This morning," he said, "word reached the several governments ofBarsoom that the keeper of the atmosphere plant had made no wirelessreport for two days, nor had almost ceaseless calls upon him from ascore of capitals elicited a sign of response.
"The ambassadors of the other nations asked us to take the matter inhand and hasten the assistant keeper to the plant.  All day a thousandcruisers have been searching for him until just now one of them returnsbearing his dead body, which was found in the pits beneath his househorribly mutilated by some assassin.
"I do not need to tell you what this means to Barsoom.  It would takemonths to penetrate those mighty walls, in fact the work has alreadycommenced, and there would be little to fear were the engine of thepumping plant to run as it should and as they all have for hundreds ofyears now; but the worst, we fear, has happened.  The instruments showa rapidly decreasing air pressure on all parts of Barsoom--the enginehas stopped."
"My gentlemen," he concluded, "we have at best three days to live."
There was absolute silence for several minutes, and then a young noblearose, and with his drawn sword held high above his head addressedTardos Mors.
"The men of Helium have prided themselves that they have ever shownBarsoom how a nation of red men should live, now is our opportunity toshow them how they should die.  Let us go about our duties as though athousand useful years still lay before us."
The chamber rang with applause and as there was nothing better to dothan to allay the fears of the people by our example we went our wayswith smiles upon our faces and sorrow gnawing at our hearts.
When I returned to my palace I found that the rumor already had reachedDejah Thoris, so I told her all that I had heard.
"We have been very happy, John Carter," she said, "and I thank whateverfate overtakes us that it permits us to die together."
The next two days brought no noticeable change in the supply of air,but on the morning of the third day breathing became difficult at thehigher altitudes of the rooftops.  The avenues and plazas of Heliumwere filled with people.  All business had ceased.  For the most partthe people looked bravely into the face of their unalterable doom.Here and there, however, men and women gave way to quiet grief.
Toward the middle of the day many of the weaker commenced to succumband within an hour the people of Barsoom were sinking by thousands intothe unconsciousness which precedes death by asphyxiation.
Dejah Thoris and I with the other members of the royal family hadcollected in a sunken garden within an inner courtyard of the palace.We conversed in low tones, when we conversed at all, as the awe of thegrim shadow of death crept over us.  Even Woola seemed to feel theweight of the impending calamity, for he pressed close to Dejah Thorisand to me, whining pitifully.
The little incubator had been brought from the roof of our palace atrequest of Dejah Thoris and now she sat gazing longingly upon theunknown little life that now she would never know.
As it was becoming perceptibly difficult to breathe Tardos Mors arose,saying,
"Let us bid each other farewell.  The days of the greatness of Barsoomare over.  Tomorrow's sun will look down upon a dead world whichthrough all eternity must go swinging through the heavens peopled noteven by memories.  It is the end."
He stooped and kissed the women of his family, and laid his strong handupon the shoulders of the men.
As I turned sadly from him my eyes fell upon Dejah Thoris.  Her headwas drooping upon her breast, to all appearances she was lifeless.With a cry I sprang to her and raised her in my arms.
Her eyes opened and looked into mine.
"Kiss me, John Carter," she murmured.  "I love you!  I love you!  It iscruel that we must be torn apart who were just starting upon a life oflove and happiness."
As I pressed her dear lips to mine the old feeling of unconquerablepower and authority rose in me.  The fighting blood of Virginia sprangto life in my veins.
"It shall not be, my princess," I cried.  "There is, there must be someway, and John Carter, who has fought his way through a strange worldfor love of you, will find it."
And with my words there crept above the threshold of my conscious minda series of nine long forgotten sounds.  Like a flash of lightning inthe darkness their full purport dawned upon me--the key to the threegreat doors of the atmosphere plant!
Turning suddenly toward Tardos Mors as I still clasped my dying love tomy breast I cried.
"A flier, Jeddak!  Quick!  Order your swiftest flier to the palace top.I can save Barsoom yet."
He did not wait to question, but in an instant a guard was racing tothe nearest dock and though the air was thin and almost gone at therooftop they managed to launch the fastest one-man, air-scout machinethat the skill of Barsoom had ever produced.
Kissing Dejah Thoris a dozen times and commanding Woola, who would havefollowed me, to remain and guard her, I bounded with my old agility andstrength to the high ramparts of the palace, and in another moment Iwas headed toward the goal of the hopes of all Barsoom.
I had to fly low to get sufficient air to breathe, but I took astraight course across an old sea bottom and so had to rise only a fewfeet above the ground.
I traveled with awful velocity for my errand was a race against timewith death.  The face of Dejah Thoris hung always before me.  As Iturned for a last look as I left the palace garden I had seen herstagger and sink upon the ground beside the little incubator.  That shehad dropped into the last coma which would end in death, if the airsupply remained unreplenished, I well knew, and so, throwing caution tothe winds, I flung overboard everything but the engine and compass,even to my ornaments, and lying on my belly along the deck with onehand on the steering wheel and the other pushing the speed lever to itslast notch I split the thin air of dying Mars with the speed of ameteor.
An hour before dark the great walls of the atmosphere plant loomedsuddenly before me, and with a sickening thud I plunged to the groundbefore the small door which was withholding the spark of life from theinhabitants of an entire planet.
Beside the door a great crew of men had been laboring to pierce thewall, but they had scarcely scratched the flint-like surface, and nowmost of them lay in the last sleep from which not even air would awakenthem.
Conditions seemed much worse here than at Helium, and it was withdifficulty that I breathed at all.  There were a few men stillconscious, and to one of these I spoke.
"If I can open these doors is there a man who can start the engines?" Iasked.
"I can," he replied, "if you open quickly.  I can last but a fewmoments more.  But it is useless, they are both dead and no one elseupon Barsoom knew the secret of these awful locks.  For three days mencrazed with fear have surged about this portal in vain attempts tosolve its mystery."
I had no time to talk, I was becoming very weak and it was withdifficulty that I controlled my mind at all.
But, with a final effort, as I sank weakly to my knees I hurled thenine thought waves at that awful thing before me.  The Martian hadcrawled to my side and with staring eyes fixed on the single panelbefore us we waited in the silence of death.
Slowly the mighty door receded before us.  I attempted to rise andfollow it but I was too weak.
"After it," I cried to my companion, "and if you reach the pump roomturn loose all the pumps.  It is the only chance Barsoom has to existtomorrow!"
From where I lay I opened the second door, and then the third, and as Isaw the hope of Barsoom crawling weakly on hands and knees through thelast doorway I sank unconscious upon the ground.



CHAPTER XXVIII
AT THE ARIZONA CAVE

It was dark when I opened my eyes again.  Strange, stiff garments wereupon my body; garments that cracked and powdered away from me as I roseto a sitting posture.
I felt myself over from head to foot and from head to foot I wasclothed, though when I fell unconscious at the little doorway I hadbeen naked.  Before me was a small patch of moonlit sky which showedthrough a ragged aperture.
As my hands passed over my body they came in contact with pockets andin one of these a small parcel of matches wrapped in oiled paper.  Oneof these matches I struck, and its dim flame lighted up what appearedto be a huge cave, toward the back of which I discovered a strange,still figure huddled over a tiny bench.  As I approached it I saw thatit was the dead and mummified remains of a little old woman with longblack hair, and the thing it leaned over was a small charcoal burnerupon which rested a round copper vessel containing a small quantity ofgreenish powder.
Behind her, depending from the roof upon rawhide thongs, and stretchingentirely across the cave, was a row of human skeletons.  From the thongwhich held them stretched another to the dead hand of the little oldwoman; as I touched the cord the skeletons swung to the motion with anoise as of the rustling of dry leaves.
It was a most grotesque and horrid tableau and I hastened out into thefresh air; glad to escape from so gruesome a place.
The sight that met my eyes as I stepped out upon a small ledge whichran before the entrance of the cave filled me with consternation.
A new heaven and a new landscape met my gaze.  The silvered mountainsin the distance, the almost stationary moon hanging in the sky, thecacti-studded valley below me were not of Mars.  I could scarcelybelieve my eyes, but the truth slowly forced itself upon me--I waslooking upon Arizona from the same ledge from which ten years before Ihad gazed with longing upon Mars.
Burying my head in my arms I turned, broken, and sorrowful, down thetrail from the cave.
Above me shone the red eye of Mars holding her awful secret,forty-eight million miles away.
Did the Martian reach the pump room?  Did the vitalizing air reach thepeople of that distant planet in time to save them?  Was my DejahThoris alive, or did her beautiful body lie cold in death beside thetiny golden incubator in the sunken garden of the inner courtyard ofthe palace of Tardos Mors, the jeddak of Helium?
For ten years I have waited and prayed for an answer to my questions.For ten years I have waited and prayed to be taken back to the world ofmy lost love.  I would rather lie dead beside her there than live onEarth all those millions of terrible miles from her.
The old mine, which I found untouched, has made me fabulously wealthy;but what care I for wealth!
As I sit here tonight in my little study overlooking the Hudson, justtwenty years have elapsed since I first opened my eyes upon Mars.
I can see her shining in the sky through the little window by my desk,and tonight she seems calling to me again as she has not called beforesince that long dead night, and I think I can see, across that awfulabyss of space, a beautiful black-haired woman standing in the gardenof a palace, and at her side is a little boy who puts his arm aroundher as she points into the sky toward the planet Earth, while at theirfeet is a huge and hideous creature with a heart of gold.
I believe that they are waiting there for me, and something tells methat I shall soon know.








End of Project Gutenberg's A Princess of Mars, by Edgar Rice Burroughs
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PRINCESS OF MARS ***
***** This file should be named 62.txt or 62.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/62/


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editionswill be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that noone owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States withoutpermission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply tocopying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works toprotect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  ProjectGutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if youcharge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If youdo not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with therules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purposesuch as creation of derivative works, reports, performances andresearch.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may dopractically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution issubject to the trademark license, especially commercialredistribution.


*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full ProjectGutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online athttp://gutenberg.net/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroyall copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by theterms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person orentity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  Seeparagraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreementand help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.  See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in thecollection are in the public domain in the United States.  If anindividual work is in the public domain in the United States and you arelocated in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you fromcopying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivativeworks based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenbergare removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the ProjectGutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works byfreely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms ofthis agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated withthe work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement bykeeping this work in the same format with its attached full ProjectGutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are ina constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, checkthe laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreementbefore downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing orcreating derivative works based on this work or any other ProjectGutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerningthe copyright status of any work in any country outside the UnitedStates.
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediateaccess to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominentlywhenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derivedfrom the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it isposted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copiedand distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any feesor charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a workwith the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on thework, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and theProject Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or1.E.9.
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additionalterms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linkedto the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with thepermission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including anyword processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to ordistribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official versionposted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide acopy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy uponrequest, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or otherform.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works providedthat
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm     License.  You must require such a user to return or     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days     of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work or group of works on different terms than are setforth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing fromboth the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and MichaelHart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact theFoundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadpublic domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tmcollection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate orcorrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectualproperty infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, acomputer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read byyour equipment.
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from.  If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium withyour written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you withthe defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of arefund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entityproviding it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity toreceive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copyis also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furtheropportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TOWARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates thelaw of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall beinterpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted bythe applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of anyprovision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordancewith this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you door cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tmwork, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to anyProject Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computersincluding obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It existsbecause of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations frompeople in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundationand how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted athttp://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extentpermitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scatteredthroughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emailbusiness@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contactinformation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officialpage at http://pglaf.org
For additional contact information:     Dr. Gregory B. Newby     Chief Executive and Director     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  ToSEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for anyparticular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donationmethods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including including checks, online payments and credit carddonations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tmconcept of a library of electronic works that could be freely sharedwith anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed ProjectGutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarilykeep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
     http://www.gutenberg.net
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.