The Project Gutenberg EBook of Essays, First Series, by Ralph Waldo Emerson
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

Title: Essays, First Series
Author: Ralph Waldo Emerson
Posting Date: December 1, 2008 [EBook #2944]Release Date: December, 2001
Language: English

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS, FIRST SERIES ***



Produced by Tony Adam




ESSAYS, FIRST SERIES
By Ralph Waldo Emerson


     HISTORY.
     There is no great and no small     To the Soul that maketh all:     And where it cometh, all things are     And it cometh everywhere.
     I am owner of the sphere,     Of the seven stars and the solar year,     Of Caesar's hand, and Plato's brain,     Of Lord Christ's heart, and Shakspeare's strain.



I. HISTORY.
THERE is one mind common to all individual men. Every man is an inlet tothe same and to all of the same. He that is once admitted to the rightof reason is made a freeman of the whole estate. What Plato has thought,he may think; what a saint has felt, he may feel; what at any time hasbefallen any man, he can understand. Who hath access to this universalmind is a party to all that is or can be done, for this is the only andsovereign agent.
Of the works of this mind history is the record. Its genius isillustrated by the entire series of days. Man is explicable by nothingless than all his history. Without hurry, without rest, the human spiritgoes forth from the beginning to embody every faculty, every thought,every emotion, which belongs to it, in appropriate events. But thethought is always prior to the fact; all the facts of history preexistin the mind as laws. Each law in turn is made by circumstancespredominant, and the limits of nature give power to but one at a time.A man is the whole encyclopaedia of facts. The creation of a thousandforests is in one acorn, and Egypt, Greece, Rome, Gaul, Britain,America, lie folded already in the first man. Epoch after epoch, camp,kingdom, empire, republic, democracy, are merely the application of hismanifold spirit to the manifold world.
This human mind wrote history, and this must read it. The Sphinx mustsolve her own riddle. If the whole of history is in one man, it is allto be explained from individual experience. There is a relation betweenthe hours of our life and the centuries of time. As the air I breathe isdrawn from the great repositories of nature, as the light on my book isyielded by a star a hundred millions of miles distant, as the poiseof my body depends on the equilibrium of centrifugal and centripetalforces, so the hours should be instructed by the ages and the agesexplained by the hours. Of the universal mind each individual man is onemore incarnation. All its properties consist in him. Each new fact inhis private experience flashes a light on what great bodies of menhave done, and the crises of his life refer to national crises. Everyrevolution was first a thought in one man's mind, and when the samethought occurs to another man, it is the key to that era. Every reformwas once a private opinion, and when it shall be a private opinion againit will solve the problem of the age. The fact narrated must correspondto something in me to be credible or intelligible. We, as we read, mustbecome Greeks, Romans, Turks, priest and king, martyr and executioner;must fasten these images to some reality in our secret experience, or weshall learn nothing rightly. What befell Asdrubal or Caesar Borgia is asmuch an illustration of the mind's powers and depravations as what hasbefallen us. Each new law and political movement has meaning for you.Stand before each of its tablets and say, 'Under this mask did myProteus nature hide itself.' This remedies the defect of our too greatnearness to ourselves. This throws our actions into perspective; andas crabs, goats, scorpions, the balance and the waterpot lose theirmeanness when hung as signs in the zodiac, so I can see my own viceswithout heat in the distant persons of Solomon, Alcibiades, andCatiline.
It is the universal nature which gives worth to particular men andthings. Human life, as containing this, is mysterious and inviolable,and we hedge it round with penalties and laws. All laws derive hencetheir ultimate reason; all express more or less distinctly some commandof this supreme, illimitable essence. Property also holds of the soul,covers great spiritual facts, and instinctively we at first hold toit with swords and laws and wide and complex combinations. The obscureconsciousness of this fact is the light of all our day, the claim ofclaims; the plea for education, for justice, for charity; the foundationof friendship and love and of the heroism and grandeur which belong toacts of self-reliance. It is remarkable that involuntarily we alwaysread as superior beings. Universal history, the poets, the romancers,do not in their stateliest pictures,--in the sacerdotal, the imperialpalaces, in the triumphs of will or of genius,--anywhere lose our ear,anywhere make us feel that we intrude, that this is for better men; butrather is it true that in their grandest strokes we feel most at home.All that Shakspeare says of the king, yonder slip of a boy that readsin the corner feels to be true of himself. We sympathize in the greatmoments of history, in the great discoveries, the great resistances, thegreat prosperities of men;--because there law was enacted, the sea wassearched, the land was found, or the blow was struck, for us, as weourselves in that place would have done or applauded.
We have the same interest in condition and character. We honor the richbecause they have externally the freedom, power, and grace which we feelto be proper to man, proper to us. So all that is said of the wise manby Stoic or Oriental or modern essayist, describes to each reader hisown idea, describes his unattained but attainable self. All literaturewrites the character of the wise man. Books, monuments, pictures,conversation, are portraits in which he finds the lineaments he isforming. The silent and the eloquent praise him and accost him, andhe is stimulated wherever he moves, as by personal allusions. A trueaspirant therefore never needs look for allusions personal and laudatoryin discourse. He hears the commendation, not of himself, but, moresweet, of that character he seeks, in every word that is said concerningcharacter, yea further in every fact and circumstance,--in the runningriver and the rustling corn. Praise is looked, homage tendered, loveflows, from mute nature, from the mountains and the lights of thefirmament.
These hints, dropped as it were from sleep and night, let us use inbroad day. The student is to read history actively and not passively; toesteem his own life the text, and books the commentary. Thus compelled,the Muse of history will utter oracles, as never to those who do notrespect themselves. I have no expectation that any man will read historyaright who thinks that what was done in a remote age, by men whose nameshave resounded far, has any deeper sense than what he is doing to-day.
The world exists for the education of each man. There is no age or stateof society or mode of action in history to which there is not somewhatcorresponding in his life. Every thing tends in a wonderful manner toabbreviate itself and yield its own virtue to him. He should see that hecan live all history in his own person. He must sit solidly at home, andnot suffer himself to be bullied by kings or empires, but know that heis greater than all the geography and all the government of the world;he must transfer the point of view from which history is commonly read,from Rome and Athens and London, to himself, and not deny his convictionthat he is the court, and if England or Egypt have any thing to say tohim he will try the case; if not, let them for ever be silent. He mustattain and maintain that lofty sight where facts yield their secretsense, and poetry and annals are alike. The instinct of the mind, thepurpose of nature, betrays itself in the use we make of the signalnarrations of history. Time dissipates to shining ether the solidangularity of facts. No anchor, no cable, no fences avail to keep a facta fact. Babylon, Troy, Tyre, Palestine, and even early Rome are passingalready into fiction. The Garden of Eden, the sun standing still inGibeon, is poetry thenceforward to all nations. Who cares what thefact was, when we have made a constellation of it to hang in heaven animmortal sign? London and Paris and New York must go the same way. "Whatis history," said Napoleon, "but a fable agreed upon?" This life of oursis stuck round with Egypt, Greece, Gaul, England, War, Colonization,Church, Court and Commerce, as with so many flowers and wild ornamentsgrave and gay. I will not make more account of them. I believe inEternity. I can find Greece, Asia, Italy, Spain and the Islands,--thegenius and creative principle of each and of all eras, in my own mind.
We are always coming up with the emphatic facts of history in ourprivate experience and verifying them here. All history becomessubjective; in other words there is properly no history, only biography.Every mind must know the whole lesson for itself,--must go over thewhole ground. What it does not see, what it does not live, it will notknow. What the former age has epitomized into a formula or rule formanipular convenience, it will lose all the good of verifying foritself, by means of the wall of that rule. Somewhere, sometime, it willdemand and find compensation for that loss, by doing the work itself.Ferguson discovered many things in astronomy which had long been known.The better for him.
History must be this or it is nothing. Every law which the state enactsindicates a fact in human nature; that is all. We must in ourselves seethe necessary reason of every fact,--see how it could and must be. Sostand before every public and private work; before an oration of Burke,before a victory of Napoleon, before a martyrdom of Sir Thomas More, ofSidney, of Marmaduke Robinson; before a French Reign of Terror, anda Salem hanging of witches; before a fanatic Revival and the AnimalMagnetism in Paris, or in Providence. We assume that we under likeinfluence should be alike affected, and should achieve the like; and weaim to master intellectually the steps and reach the same height or thesame degradation that our fellow, our proxy has done.
All inquiry into antiquity, all curiosity respecting the Pyramids, theexcavated cities, Stonehenge, the Ohio Circles, Mexico, Memphis,--is thedesire to do away this wild, savage, and preposterous There or Then, andintroduce in its place the Here and the Now. Belzoni digs and measuresin the mummy-pits and pyramids of Thebes, until he can see the endof the difference between the monstrous work and himself. When he hassatisfied himself, in general and in detail, that it was made by such aperson as he, so armed and so motived, and to ends to which he himselfshould also have worked, the problem is solved; his thought lives alongthe whole line of temples and sphinxes and catacombs, passes throughthem all with satisfaction, and they live again to the mind, or are now.
A Gothic cathedral affirms that it was done by us and not done byus. Surely it was by man, but we find it not in our man. But we applyourselves to the history of its production. We put ourselves into theplace and state of the builder. We remember the forest-dwellers, thefirst temples, the adherence to the first type, and the decoration of itas the wealth of the nation increased; the value which is given to woodby carving led to the carving over the whole mountain of stone of acathedral. When we have gone through this process, and added thereto theCatholic Church, its cross, its music, its processions, its Saints'days and image-worship, we have as it were been the man that made theminster; we have seen how it could and must be. We have the sufficientreason.
The difference between men is in their principle of association.Some men classify objects by color and size and other accidents ofappearance; others by intrinsic likeness, or by the relation of causeand effect. The progress of the intellect is to the clearer visionof causes, which neglects surface differences. To the poet, to thephilosopher, to the saint, all things are friendly and sacred, allevents profitable, all days holy, all men divine. For the eye isfastened on the life, and slights the circumstance. Every chemicalsubstance, every plant, every animal in its growth, teaches the unity ofcause, the variety of appearance.
Upborne and surrounded as we are by this all-creating nature, soft andfluid as a cloud or the air, why should we be such hard pedants,and magnify a few forms? Why should we make account of time, or ofmagnitude, or of figure? The soul knows them not, and genius, obeyingits law, knows how to play with them as a young child plays withgraybeards and in churches. Genius studies the causal thought, and farback in the womb of things sees the rays parting from one orb, thatdiverge, ere they fall, by infinite diameters. Genius watches the monadthrough all his masks as he performs the metempsychosis of nature.Genius detects through the fly, through the caterpillar, through thegrub, through the egg, the constant individual; through countlessindividuals the fixed species; through many species the genus; throughall genera the steadfast type; through all the kingdoms of organizedlife the eternal unity. Nature is a mutable cloud which is always andnever the same. She casts the same thought into troops of forms, asa poet makes twenty fables with one moral. Through the bruteness andtoughness of matter, a subtle spirit bends all things to its own will.The adamant streams into soft but precise form before it, and whilstI look at it its outline and texture are changed again. Nothing is sofleeting as form; yet never does it quite deny itself. In man we stilltrace the remains or hints of all that we esteem badges of servitude inthe lower races; yet in him they enhance his nobleness and grace; asIo, in Aeschylus, transformed to a cow, offends the imagination; but howchanged when as Isis in Egypt she meets Osiris-Jove, a beautiful womanwith nothing of the metamorphosis left but the lunar horns as thesplendid ornament of her brows!
The identity of history is equally intrinsic, the diversity equallyobvious. There is, at the surface, infinite variety of things; at thecentre there is simplicity of cause. How many are the acts of one manin which we recognize the same character! Observe the sources of ourinformation in respect to the Greek genius. We have the civil history ofthat people, as Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, and Plutarch have givenit; a very sufficient account of what manner of persons they were andwhat they did. We have the same national mind expressed for us again intheir literature, in epic and lyric poems, drama, and philosophy; a verycomplete form. Then we have it once more in their architecture, a beautyas of temperance itself, limited to the straight line and the square,--abuilded geometry. Then we have it once again in sculpture, the "tongueon the balance of expression," a multitude of forms in the utmostfreedom of action and never transgressing the ideal serenity; likevotaries performing some religious dance before the gods, and, though inconvulsive pain or mortal combat, never daring to break the figure anddecorum of their dance. Thus of the genius of one remarkable people wehave a fourfold representation: and to the senses what more unlike thanan ode of Pindar, a marble centaur, the peristyle of the Parthenon, andthe last actions of Phocion?
Every one must have observed faces and forms which, without anyresembling feature, make a like impression on the beholder. A particularpicture or copy of verses, if it do not awaken the same train of images,will yet superinduce the same sentiment as some wild mountain walk,although the resemblance is nowise obvious to the senses, but isoccult and out of the reach of the understanding. Nature is an endlesscombination and repetition of a very few laws. She hums the oldwell-known air through innumerable variations.
Nature is full of a sublime family likeness throughout her works,and delights in startling us with resemblances in the most unexpectedquarters. I have seen the head of an old sachem of the forest which atonce reminded the eye of a bald mountain summit, and the furrows of thebrow suggested the strata of the rock. There are men whose manners havethe same essential splendor as the simple and awful sculpture on thefriezes of the Parthenon and the remains of the earliest Greek art. Andthere are compositions of the same strain to be found in the books ofall ages. What is Guido's Rospigliosi Aurora but a morning thought,as the horses in it are only a morning cloud? If any one will but takepains to observe the variety of actions to which he is equally inclinedin certain moods of mind, and those to which he is averse, he will seehow deep is the chain of affinity.
A painter told me that nobody could draw a tree without in some sortbecoming a tree; or draw a child by studying the outlines of its formmerely,--but, by watching for a time his motions and plays, the painterenters into his nature and can then draw him at will in everyattitude. So Roos "entered into the inmost nature of a sheep." I knewa draughtsman employed in a public survey who found that he could notsketch the rocks until their geological structure was first explained tohim. In a certain state of thought is the common origin of very diverseworks. It is the spirit and not the fact that is identical. By a deeperapprehension, and not primarily by a painful acquisition of many manualskills, the artist attains the power of awakening other souls to a givenactivity.
It has been said that "common souls pay with what they do, nobler soulswith that which they are." And why? Because a profound nature awakensin us by its actions and words, by its very looks and manners, the samepower and beauty that a gallery of sculpture or of pictures addresses.
Civil and natural history, the history of art and of literature, mustbe explained from individual history, or must remain words. Thereis nothing but is related to us, nothing that does not interestus,--kingdom, college, tree, horse, or iron shoe,--the roots of allthings are in man. Santa Croce and the Dome of St. Peter's arelame copies after a divine model. Strasburg Cathedral is a materialcounterpart of the soul of Erwin of Steinbach. The true poem is thepoet's mind; the true ship is the ship-builder. In the man, could we layhim open, we should see the reason for the last flourish and tendrilof his work; as every spine and tint in the sea-shell preexists in thesecreting organs of the fish. The whole of heraldry and of chivalry isin courtesy. A man of fine manners shall pronounce your name with allthe ornament that titles of nobility could ever add.
The trivial experience of every day is always verifying some oldprediction to us and converting into things the words and signs whichwe had heard and seen without heed. A lady with whom I was riding in theforest said to me that the woods always seemed to her to wait, as ifthe genii who inhabit them suspended their deeds until the wayfarer hadpassed onward; a thought which poetry has celebrated in the dance of thefairies, which breaks off on the approach of human feet. The man whohas seen the rising moon break out of the clouds at midnight, has beenpresent like an archangel at the creation of light and of the world. Iremember one summer day in the fields my companion pointed out to mea broad cloud, which might extend a quarter of a mile parallel tothe horizon, quite accurately in the form of a cherub as painted overchurches,--a round block in the centre, which it was easy to animatewith eyes and mouth, supported on either side by wide-stretchedsymmetrical wings. What appears once in the atmosphere may appear often,and it was undoubtedly the archetype of that familiar ornament. I haveseen in the sky a chain of summer lightning which at once showed to methat the Greeks drew from nature when they painted the thunderbolt inthe hand of Jove. I have seen a snow-drift along the sides of the stonewall which obviously gave the idea of the common architectural scroll toabut a tower.
By surrounding ourselves with the original circumstances we invent anewthe orders and the ornaments of architecture, as we see how each peoplemerely decorated its primitive abodes. The Doric temple preserves thesemblance of the wooden cabin in which the Dorian dwelt. The Chinesepagoda is plainly a Tartar tent. The Indian and Egyptian temples stillbetray the mounds and subterranean houses of their forefathers. "Thecustom of making houses and tombs in the living rock," says Heerenin his Researches on the Ethiopians, "determined very naturally theprincipal character of the Nubian Egyptian architecture to the colossalform which it assumed. In these caverns, already prepared by nature, theeye was accustomed to dwell on huge shapes and masses, so that whenart came to the assistance of nature it could not move on a small scalewithout degrading itself. What would statues of the usual size, or neatporches and wings have been, associated with those gigantic halls beforewhich only Colossi could sit as watchmen or lean on the pillars of theinterior?"
The Gothic church plainly originated in a rude adaptation of the foresttrees, with all their boughs, to a festal or solemn arcade; as the bandsabout the cleft pillars still indicate the green withes that tied them.No one can walk in a road cut through pine woods, without being struckwith the architectural appearance of the grove, especially in winter,when the barrenness of all other trees shows the low arch of the Saxons.In the woods in a winter afternoon one will see as readily the origin ofthe stained glass window, with which the Gothic cathedrals are adorned,in the colors of the western sky seen through the bare and crossingbranches of the forest. Nor can any lover of nature enter the old pilesof Oxford and the English cathedrals, without feeling that the forestoverpowered the mind of the builder, and that his chisel, his saw andplane still reproduced its ferns, its spikes of flowers, its locust,elm, oak, pine, fir and spruce.
The Gothic cathedral is a blossoming in stone subdued by the insatiabledemand of harmony in man. The mountain of granite blooms into an eternalflower, with the lightness and delicate finish as well as the aerialproportions and perspective of vegetable beauty.
In like manner all public facts are to be individualized, all privatefacts are to be generalized. Then at once History becomes fluid andtrue, and Biography deep and sublime. As the Persian imitated in theslender shafts and capitals of his architecture the stem and flower ofthe lotus and palm, so the Persian court in its magnificent era nevergave over the nomadism of its barbarous tribes, but travelled fromEcbatana, where the spring was spent, to Susa in summer and to Babylonfor the winter.
In the early history of Asia and Africa, Nomadism and Agricultureare the two antagonist facts. The geography of Asia and of Africanecessitated a nomadic life. But the nomads were the terror of all thosewhom the soil or the advantages of a market had induced to build towns.Agriculture therefore was a religious injunction, because of the perilsof the state from nomadism. And in these late and civil countries ofEngland and America these propensities still fight out the oldbattle, in the nation and in the individual. The nomads of Africa wereconstrained to wander, by the attacks of the gad-fly, which drives thecattle mad, and so compels the tribe to emigrate in the rainy season andto drive off the cattle to the higher sandy regions. The nomads of Asiafollow the pasturage from month to month. In America and Europe thenomadism is of trade and curiosity; a progress, certainly, from thegad-fly of Astaboras to the Anglo and Italo-mania of Boston Bay. Sacredcities, to which a periodical religious pilgrimage was enjoined, orstringent laws and customs, tending to invigorate the national bond,were the check on the old rovers; and the cumulative values of longresidence are the restraints on the itineracy of the present day. Theantagonism of the two tendencies is not less active in individuals, asthe love of adventure or the love of repose happens to predominate.A man of rude health and flowing spirits has the faculty of rapiddomestication, lives in his wagon and roams through all latitudes aseasily as a Calmuc. At sea, or in the forest, or in the snow, he sleepsas warm, dines with as good appetite, and associates as happily asbeside his own chimneys. Or perhaps his facility is deeper seated, inthe increased range of his faculties of observation, which yield himpoints of interest wherever fresh objects meet his eyes. The pastoralnations were needy and hungry to desperation; and this intellectualnomadism, in its excess, bankrupts the mind through the dissipation ofpower on a miscellany of objects. The home-keeping wit, on the otherhand, is that continence or content which finds all the elements oflife in its own soil; and which has its own perils of monotony anddeterioration, if not stimulated by foreign infusions.
Every thing the individual sees without him corresponds to his statesof mind, and every thing is in turn intelligible to him, as his onwardthinking leads him into the truth to which that fact or series belongs.
The primeval world,--the Fore-World, as the Germans say,--I can diveto it in myself as well as grope for it with researching fingers incatacombs, libraries, and the broken reliefs and torsos of ruinedvillas.
What is the foundation of that interest all men feel in Greek history,letters, art, and poetry, in all its periods from the Heroic or Homericage down to the domestic life of the Athenians and Spartans, four orfive centuries later? What but this, that every man passes personallythrough a Grecian period. The Grecian state is the era of the bodilynature, the perfection of the senses,--of the spiritual nature unfoldedin strict unity with the body. In it existed those human forms whichsupplied the sculptor with his models of Hercules, Phoebus, and Jove;not like the forms abounding in the streets of modern cities, whereinthe face is a confused blur of features, but composed of incorrupt,sharply defined and symmetrical features, whose eye-sockets are soformed that it would be impossible for such eyes to squint and takefurtive glances on this side and on that, but they must turn the wholehead. The manners of that period are plain and fierce. The reverenceexhibited is for personal qualities; courage, address, self-command,justice, strength, swiftness, a loud voice, a broad chest. Luxury andelegance are not known. A sparse population and want make every man hisown valet, cook, butcher and soldier, and the habit of supplying hisown needs educates the body to wonderful performances. Such are theAgamemnon and Diomed of Homer, and not far different is the pictureXenophon gives of himself and his compatriots in the Retreat of the TenThousand. "After the army had crossed the river Teleboas in Armenia,there fell much snow, and the troops lay miserably on the ground coveredwith it. But Xenophon arose naked, and taking an axe, began to splitwood; whereupon others rose and did the like." Throughout his armyexists a boundless liberty of speech. They quarrel for plunder,they wrangle with the generals on each new order, and Xenophon is assharp-tongued as any and sharper-tongued than most, and so gives as goodas he gets. Who does not see that this is a gang of great boys, withsuch a code of honor and such lax discipline as great boys have?
The costly charm of the ancient tragedy, and indeed of all the oldliterature, is that the persons speak simply,--speak as persons who havegreat good sense without knowing it, before yet the reflective habit hasbecome the predominant habit of the mind. Our admiration of the antiqueis not admiration of the old, but of the natural. The Greeks are notreflective, but perfect in their senses and in their health, withthe finest physical organization in the world. Adults acted with thesimplicity and grace of children. They made vases, tragedies, andstatues, such as healthy senses should,--that is, in good taste. Suchthings have continued to be made in all ages, and are now, wherevera healthy physique exists; but, as a class, from their superiororganization, they have surpassed all. They combine the energy ofmanhood with the engaging unconsciousness of childhood. The attractionof these manners is that they belong to man, and are known to everyman in virtue of his being once a child; besides that there are alwaysindividuals who retain these characteristics. A person of childlikegenius and inborn energy is still a Greek, and revives our love ofthe Muse of Hellas. I admire the love of nature in the Philoctetes. Inreading those fine apostrophes to sleep, to the stars, rocks, mountainsand waves, I feel time passing away as an ebbing sea. I feel theeternity of man, the identity of his thought. The Greek had it seems thesame fellow-beings as I. The sun and moon, water and fire, met his heartprecisely as they meet mine. Then the vaunted distinction between Greekand English, between Classic and Romantic schools, seems superficial andpedantic. When a thought of Plato becomes a thought to me,--when a truththat fired the soul of Pindar fires mine, time is no more. When I feelthat we two meet in a perception, that our two souls are tinged with thesame hue, and do as it were run into one, why should I measure degreesof latitude, why should I count Egyptian years?
The student interprets the age of chivalry by his own age of chivalry,and the days of maritime adventure and circumnavigation by quiteparallel miniature experiences of his own. To the sacred history of theworld he has the same key. When the voice of a prophet out of the deepsof antiquity merely echoes to him a sentiment of his infancy, a prayerof his youth, he then pierces to the truth through all the confusion oftradition and the caricature of institutions.
Rare, extravagant spirits come by us at intervals, who disclose to usnew facts in nature. I see that men of God have from time to time walkedamong men and made their commission felt in the heart and soul of thecommonest hearer. Hence evidently the tripod, the priest, the priestessinspired by the divine afflatus.
Jesus astonishes and overpowers sensual people. They cannot unite him tohistory, or reconcile him with themselves. As they come to revere theirintuitions and aspire to live holily, their own piety explains everyfact, every word.
How easily these old worships of Moses, of Zoroaster, of Menu, ofSocrates, domesticate themselves in the mind. I cannot find anyantiquity in them. They are mine as much as theirs.
I have seen the first monks and anchorets, without crossing seas orcenturies. More than once some individual has appeared to me withsuch negligence of labor and such commanding contemplation, a haughtybeneficiary begging in the name of God, as made good to the nineteenthcentury Simeon the Stylite, the Thebais, and the first Capuchins.
The priestcraft of the East and West, of the Magian, Brahmin, Druid,and Inca, is expounded in the individual's private life. The crampinginfluence of a hard formalist on a young child, in repressing hisspirits and courage, paralyzing the understanding, and that withoutproducing indignation, but only fear and obedience, and even muchsympathy with the tyranny,--is a familiar fact, explained to the childwhen he becomes a man, only by seeing that the oppressor of his youthis himself a child tyrannized over by those names and words and forms ofwhose influence he was merely the organ to the youth. The fact teacheshim how Belus was worshipped and how the Pyramids were built, betterthan the discovery by Champollion of the names of all the workmen andthe cost of every tile. He finds Assyria and the Mounds of Cholula athis door, and himself has laid the courses.
Again, in that protest which each considerate person makes against thesuperstition of his times, he repeats step for step the part of oldreformers, and in the search after truth finds, like them, new perils tovirtue. He learns again what moral vigor is needed to supply the girdleof a superstition. A great licentiousness treads on the heels of areformation. How many times in the history of the world has the Lutherof the day had to lament the decay of piety in his own household!"Doctor," said his wife to Martin Luther, one day, "how is it thatwhilst subject to papacy we prayed so often and with such fervor, whilstnow we pray with the utmost coldness and very seldom?"
The advancing man discovers how deep a property he has inliterature,--in all fable as well as in all history. He finds that thepoet was no odd fellow who described strange and impossible situations,but that universal man wrote by his pen a confession true for one andtrue for all. His own secret biography he finds in lines wonderfullyintelligible to him, dotted down before he was born. One after anotherhe comes up in his private adventures with every fable of Aesop, ofHomer, of Hafiz, of Ariosto, of Chaucer, of Scott, and verifies themwith his own head and hands.
The beautiful fables of the Greeks, being proper creations of theimagination and not of the fancy, are universal verities. What a rangeof meanings and what perpetual pertinence has the story of Prometheus!Beside its primary value as the first chapter of the history of Europe,(the mythology thinly veiling authentic facts, the invention of themechanic arts and the migration of colonies,) it gives the history ofreligion, with some closeness to the faith of later ages. Prometheus isthe Jesus of the old mythology. He is the friend of man; stands betweenthe unjust "justice" of the Eternal Father and the race of mortals, andreadily suffers all things on their account. But where it departs fromthe Calvinistic Christianity and exhibits him as the defier of Jove, itrepresents a state of mind which readily appears wherever the doctrineof Theism is taught in a crude, objective form, and which seems theself-defence of man against this untruth, namely a discontent with thebelieved fact that a God exists, and a feeling that the obligationof reverence is onerous. It would steal if it could the fire of theCreator, and live apart from him and independent of him. The PrometheusVinctus is the romance of skepticism. Not less true to all time are thedetails of that stately apologue. Apollo kept the flocks of Admetus,said the poets. When the gods come among men, they are not known. Jesuswas not; Socrates and Shakspeare were not. Antaeus was suffocated bythe gripe of Hercules, but every time he touched his mother earth hisstrength was renewed. Man is the broken giant, and in all his weaknessboth his body and his mind are invigorated by habits of conversationwith nature. The power of music, the power of poetry, to unfix and as itwere clap wings to solid nature, interprets the riddle of Orpheus. Thephilosophical perception of identity through endless mutations ofform makes him know the Proteus. What else am I who laughed or weptyesterday, who slept last night like a corpse, and this morning stoodand ran? And what see I on any side but the transmigrations of Proteus?I can symbolize my thought by using the name of any creature, of anyfact, because every creature is man agent or patient. Tantalus is buta name for you and me. Tantalus means the impossibility of drinking thewaters of thought which are always gleaming and waving within sight ofthe soul. The transmigration of souls is no fable. I would it were; butmen and women are only half human. Every animal of the barn-yard, thefield and the forest, of the earth and of the waters that are underthe earth, has contrived to get a footing and to leave the print of itsfeatures and form in some one or other of these upright, heaven-facingspeakers. Ah! brother, stop the ebb of thy soul,--ebbing downward intothe forms into whose habits thou hast now for many years slid. As nearand proper to us is also that old fable of the Sphinx, who was saidto sit in the road-side and put riddles to every passenger. If the mancould not answer, she swallowed him alive. If he could solve the riddle,the Sphinx was slain. What is our life but an endless flight of wingedfacts or events? In splendid variety these changes come, all puttingquestions to the human spirit. Those men who cannot answer by a superiorwisdom these facts or questions of time, serve them. Facts encumberthem, tyrannize over them, and make the men of routine, the men ofsense, in whom a literal obedience to facts has extinguished every sparkof that light by which man is truly man. But if the man is true to hisbetter instincts or sentiments, and refuses the dominion of facts, asone that comes of a higher race; remains fast by the soul and sees theprinciple, then the facts fall aptly and supple into their places; theyknow their master, and the meanest of them glorifies him.
See in Goethe's Helena the same desire that every word should be athing. These figures, he would say, these Chirons, Griffins, Phorkyas,Helen and Leda, are somewhat, and do exert a specific influence on themind. So far then are they eternal entities, as real to-day as in thefirst Olympiad. Much revolving them he writes out freely his humor, andgives them body to his own imagination. And although that poem be asvague and fantastic as a dream, yet is it much more attractive than themore regular dramatic pieces of the same author, for the reason that itoperates a wonderful relief to the mind from the routine of customaryimages,--awakens the reader's invention and fancy by the wild freedom ofthe design, and by the unceasing succession of brisk shocks of surprise.
The universal nature, too strong for the petty nature of the bard, sitson his neck and writes through his hand; so that when he seems to venta mere caprice and wild romance, the issue is an exact allegory. HencePlato said that "poets utter great and wise things which they do notthemselves understand." All the fictions of the Middle Age explainthemselves as a masked or frolic expression of that which in graveearnest the mind of that period toiled to achieve. Magic and all thatis ascribed to it is a deep presentiment of the powers of science. Theshoes of swiftness, the sword of sharpness, the power of subduing theelements, of using the secret virtues of minerals, of understandingthe voices of birds, are the obscure efforts of the mind in a rightdirection. The preternatural prowess of the hero, the gift of perpetualyouth, and the like, are alike the endeavour of the human spirit "tobend the shows of things to the desires of the mind."
In Perceforest and Amadis de Gaul a garland and a rose bloom on the headof her who is faithful, and fade on the brow of the inconstant. In thestory of the Boy and the Mantle even a mature reader may be surprisedwith a glow of virtuous pleasure at the triumph of the gentle Venelas;and indeed all the postulates of elfin annals,--that the fairies do notlike to be named; that their gifts are capricious and not to be trusted;that who seeks a treasure must not speak; and the like,--I find true inConcord, however they might be in Cornwall or Bretagne.
Is it otherwise in the newest romance? I read the Bride of Lammermoor.Sir William Ashton is a mask for a vulgar temptation, Ravenswood Castlea fine name for proud poverty, and the foreign mission of state only aBunyan disguise for honest industry. We may all shoot a wild bull thatwould toss the good and beautiful, by fighting down the unjust andsensual. Lucy Ashton is another name for fidelity, which is alwaysbeautiful and always liable to calamity in this world.


But along with the civil and metaphysical history of man, anotherhistory goes daily forward,--that of the external world,--in which he isnot less strictly implicated. He is the compend of time; he is alsothe correlative of nature. His power consists in the multitude of hisaffinities, in the fact that his life is intertwined with the wholechain of organic and inorganic being. In old Rome the public roadsbeginning at the Forum proceeded north, south, east, west, to the centreof every province of the empire, making each market-town of Persia,Spain and Britain pervious to the soldiers of the capital: so out ofthe human heart go as it were highways to the heart of every object innature, to reduce it under the dominion of man. A man is a bundle ofrelations, a knot of roots, whose flower and fruitage is the world. Hisfaculties refer to natures out of him and predict the world he is toinhabit, as the fins of the fish foreshow that water exists, or thewings of an eagle in the egg presuppose air. He cannot live without aworld. Put Napoleon in an island prison, let his faculties find no mento act on, no Alps to climb, no stake to play for, and he would beatthe air, and appear stupid. Transport him to large countries, densepopulation, complex interests and antagonist power, and you shall seethat the man Napoleon, bounded that is by such a profile and outline, isnot the virtual Napoleon. This is but Talbot's shadow;--
     "His substance is not here.     For what you see is but the smallest part     And least proportion of humanity;     But were the whole frame here,     It is of such a spacious, lofty pitch,     Your roof were not sufficient to contain it."     --Henry VI.
Columbus needs a planet to shape his course upon. Newton and Laplaceneed myriads of age and thick-strewn celestial areas. One may say agravitating solar system is already prophesied in the nature of Newton'smind. Not less does the brain of Davy or of Gay-Lussac, from childhoodexploring the affinities and repulsions of particles, anticipate thelaws of organization. Does not the eye of the human embryo predict thelight? the ear of Handel predict the witchcraft of harmonic sound? Donot the constructive fingers of Watt, Fulton, Whittemore, Arkwright,predict the fusible, hard, and temperable texture of metals, theproperties of stone, water, and wood? Do not the lovely attributesof the maiden child predict the refinements and decorations of civilsociety? Here also we are reminded of the action of man on man. A mindmight ponder its thought for ages and not gain so much self-knowledge asthe passion of love shall teach it in a day. Who knows himself beforehe has been thrilled with indignation at an outrage, or has heard aneloquent tongue, or has shared the throb of thousands in a nationalexultation or alarm? No man can antedate his experience, or guess whatfaculty or feeling a new object shall unlock, any more than he can drawto-day the face of a person whom he shall see to-morrow for the firsttime.
I will not now go behind the general statement to explore the reasonof this correspondency. Let it suffice that in the light of these twofacts, namely, that the mind is One, and that nature is its correlative,history is to be read and written.
Thus in all ways does the soul concentrate and reproduce its treasuresfor each pupil. He too shall pass through the whole cycle of experience.He shall collect into a focus the rays of nature. History no longershall be a dull book. It shall walk incarnate in every just and wiseman. You shall not tell me by languages and titles a catalogue of thevolumes you have read. You shall make me feel what periods you havelived. A man shall be the Temple of Fame. He shall walk, as the poetshave described that goddess, in a robe painted all over with wonderfulevents and experiences;--his own form and features by their exaltedintelligence shall be that variegated vest. I shall find in him theForeworld; in his childhood the Age of Gold, the Apples of Knowledge,the Argonautic Expedition, the calling of Abraham, the building of theTemple, the Advent of Christ, Dark Ages, the Revival of Letters, theReformation, the discovery of new lands, the opening of new sciences andnew regions in man. He shall be the priest of Pan, and bring with himinto humble cottages the blessing of the morning stars, and all therecorded benefits of heaven and earth.
Is there somewhat overweening in this claim? Then I reject all I havewritten, for what is the use of pretending to know what we know not? Butit is the fault of our rhetoric that we cannot strongly state one factwithout seeming to belie some other. I hold our actual knowledge verycheap. Hear the rats in the wall, see the lizard on the fence,the fungus under foot, the lichen on the log. What do I knowsympathetically, morally, of either of these worlds of life? As oldas the Caucasian man,--perhaps older,--these creatures have kept theircounsel beside him, and there is no record of any word or sign that haspassed from one to the other. What connection do the books show betweenthe fifty or sixty chemical elements and the historical eras? Nay, whatdoes history yet record of the metaphysical annals of man? What lightdoes it shed on those mysteries which we hide under the names Deathand Immortality? Yet every history should be written in a wisdom whichdivined the range of our affinities and looked at facts as symbols. I amashamed to see what a shallow village tale our so-called History is. Howmany times we must say Rome, and Paris, and Constantinople! What doesRome know of rat and lizard? What are Olympiads and Consulates to theseneighboring systems of being? Nay, what food or experience or succorhave they for the Esquimaux seal-hunter, for the Kanaka in his canoe,for the fisherman, the stevedore, the porter?
Broader and deeper we must write our annals,--from an ethicalreformation, from an influx of the ever new, ever sanativeconscience,--if we would trulier express our central and wide-relatednature, instead of this old chronology of selfishness and pride to whichwe have too long lent our eyes. Already that day exists for us, shinesin on us at unawares, but the path of science and of letters is notthe way into nature. The idiot, the Indian, the child and unschooledfarmer's boy stand nearer to the light by which nature is to be read,than the dissector or the antiquary.
*****

     SELF-RELIANCE.
     "Ne te quaesiveris extra."
     "Man is his own star; and the soul that can     Render an honest and a perfect man,     Commands all light, all influence, all fate;     Nothing to him falls early or too late.     Our acts our angels are, or good or ill,     Our fatal shadows that walk by us still."
     Epilogue to Beaumont and Fletcher's Honest Man's Fortune.


     Cast the bantling on the rocks,     Suckle him with the she-wolf's teat,     Wintered with the hawk and fox.     Power and speed be hands and feet.



II. SELF-RELIANCE.
I READ the other day some verses written by an eminent painter whichwere original and not conventional. The soul always hears an admonitionin such lines, let the subject be what it may. The sentiment they instilis of more value than any thought they may contain. To believe your ownthought, to believe that what is true for you in your private heart istrue for all men,--that is genius. Speak your latent conviction, andit shall be the universal sense; for the inmost in due time becomes theoutmost, and our first thought is rendered back to us by the trumpetsof the Last Judgment. Familiar as the voice of the mind is to each, thehighest merit we ascribe to Moses, Plato and Milton is that they setat naught books and traditions, and spoke not what men, but what theythought. A man should learn to detect and watch that gleam of lightwhich flashes across his mind from within, more than the lustre ofthe firmament of bards and sages. Yet he dismisses without notice histhought, because it is his. In every work of genius we recognize ourown rejected thoughts; they come back to us with a certain alienatedmajesty. Great works of art have no more affecting lesson for usthan this. They teach us to abide by our spontaneous impression withgood-humored inflexibility then most when the whole cry of voices is onthe other side. Else to-morrow a stranger will say with masterly goodsense precisely what we have thought and felt all the time, and we shallbe forced to take with shame our own opinion from another.
There is a time in every man's education when he arrives at theconviction that envy is ignorance; that imitation is suicide; that hemust take himself for better for worse as his portion; that though thewide universe is full of good, no kernel of nourishing corn can come tohim but through his toil bestowed on that plot of ground which is givento him to till. The power which resides in him is new in nature, andnone but he knows what that is which he can do, nor does he know untilhe has tried. Not for nothing one face, one character, one fact, makesmuch impression on him, and another none. This sculpture in the memoryis not without preestablished harmony. The eye was placed where one rayshould fall, that it might testify of that particular ray. We but halfexpress ourselves, and are ashamed of that divine idea which each ofus represents. It may be safely trusted as proportionate and of goodissues, so it be faithfully imparted, but God will not have his workmade manifest by cowards. A man is relieved and gay when he has puthis heart into his work and done his best; but what he has said or doneotherwise shall give him no peace. It is a deliverance which does notdeliver. In the attempt his genius deserts him; no muse befriends; noinvention, no hope.
Trust thyself: every heart vibrates to that iron string. Accept theplace the divine providence has found for you, the society of yourcontemporaries, the connection of events. Great men have always done so,and confided themselves childlike to the genius of their age, betrayingtheir perception that the absolutely trustworthy was seated at theirheart, working through their hands, predominating in all their being.And we are now men, and must accept in the highest mind the sametranscendent destiny; and not minors and invalids in a protected corner,not cowards fleeing before a revolution, but guides, redeemers andbenefactors, obeying the Almighty effort and advancing on Chaos and theDark.
What pretty oracles nature yields us on this text in the face andbehavior of children, babes, and even brutes! That divided and rebelmind, that distrust of a sentiment because our arithmetic has computedthe strength and means opposed to our purpose, these have not. Theirmind being whole, their eye is as yet unconquered, and when we look intheir faces we are disconcerted. Infancy conforms to nobody; all conformto it; so that one babe commonly makes four or five out of the adultswho prattle and play to it. So God has armed youth and puberty andmanhood no less with its own piquancy and charm, and made it enviableand gracious and its claims not to be put by, if it will stand byitself. Do not think the youth has no force, because he cannot speak toyou and me. Hark! in the next room his voice is sufficiently clear andemphatic. It seems he knows how to speak to his contemporaries. Bashfulor bold then, he will know how to make us seniors very unnecessary.
The nonchalance of boys who are sure of a dinner, and would disdainas much as a lord to do or say aught to conciliate one, is the healthyattitude of human nature. A boy is in the parlor what the pit is in theplayhouse; independent, irresponsible, looking out from his corner onsuch people and facts as pass by, he tries and sentences them on theirmerits, in the swift, summary way of boys, as good, bad, interesting,silly, eloquent, troublesome. He cumbers himself never aboutconsequences, about interests; he gives an independent, genuine verdict.You must court him; he does not court you. But the man is as it wereclapped into jail by his consciousness. As soon as he has once acted orspoken with eclat he is a committed person, watched by the sympathyor the hatred of hundreds, whose affections must now enter into hisaccount. There is no Lethe for this. Ah, that he could pass again intohis neutrality! Who can thus avoid all pledges and, having observed,observe again from the same unaffected, unbiased, unbribable,unaffrighted innocence,--must always be formidable. He would utteropinions on all passing affairs, which being seen to be not private butnecessary, would sink like darts into the ear of men and put them infear.
These are the voices which we hear in solitude, but they grow faintand inaudible as we enter into the world. Society everywhere is inconspiracy against the manhood of every one of its members. Society is ajoint-stock company, in which the members agree, for the better securingof his bread to each shareholder, to surrender the liberty and cultureof the eater. The virtue in most request is conformity. Self-relianceis its aversion. It loves not realities and creators, but names andcustoms.
Whoso would be a man, must be a nonconformist. He who would gatherimmortal palms must not be hindered by the name of goodness, but mustexplore if it be goodness. Nothing is at last sacred but the integrityof your own mind. Absolve you to yourself, and you shall have thesuffrage of the world. I remember an answer which when quite young I wasprompted to make to a valued adviser who was wont to importune me withthe dear old doctrines of the church. On my saying, "What have I to dowith the sacredness of traditions, if I live wholly from within?" myfriend suggested,--"But these impulses may be from below, not fromabove." I replied, "They do not seem to me to be such; but if I am theDevil's child, I will live then from the Devil." No law can be sacredto me but that of my nature. Good and bad are but names very readilytransferable to that or this; the only right is what is after myconstitution; the only wrong what is against it. A man is to carryhimself in the presence of all opposition as if every thing were titularand ephemeral but he. I am ashamed to think how easily we capitulate tobadges and names, to large societies and dead institutions. Every decentand well-spoken individual affects and sways me more than is right. Iought to go upright and vital, and speak the rude truth in all ways. Ifmalice and vanity wear the coat of philanthropy, shall that pass? If anangry bigot assumes this bountiful cause of Abolition, and comes to mewith his last news from Barbadoes, why should I not say to him, 'Go lovethy infant; love thy wood-chopper; be good-natured and modest; havethat grace; and never varnish your hard, uncharitable ambition with thisincredible tenderness for black folk a thousand miles off. Thy love afaris spite at home.' Rough and graceless would be such greeting, but truthis handsomer than the affectation of love. Your goodness must have someedge to it,--else it is none. The doctrine of hatred must be preached,as the counteraction of the doctrine of love, when that pules andwhines. I shun father and mother and wife and brother when my geniuscalls me. I would write on the lintels of the door-post, _Whim_. I hopeit is somewhat better than whim at last, but we cannot spend the dayin explanation. Expect me not to show cause why I seek or why I excludecompany. Then again, do not tell me, as a good man did to-day, of myobligation to put all poor men in good situations. Are they my poor?I tell thee thou foolish philanthropist that I grudge the dollar, thedime, the cent, I give to such men as do not belong to me and to whomI do not belong. There is a class of persons to whom by all spiritualaffinity I am bought and sold; for them I will go to prison if need be;but your miscellaneous popular charities; the education at college offools; the building of meeting-houses to the vain end to which many nowstand; alms to sots, and the thousand-fold Relief Societies;--thoughI confess with shame I sometimes succumb and give the dollar, it is awicked dollar which by and by I shall have the manhood to withhold.
Virtues are, in the popular estimate, rather the exception than therule. There is the man and his virtues. Men do what is called a goodaction, as some piece of courage or charity, much as they would pay afine in expiation of daily non-appearance on parade. Their works aredone as an apology or extenuation of their living in the world,--asinvalids and the insane pay a high board. Their virtues are penances. Ido not wish to expiate, but to live. My life is for itself and not fora spectacle. I much prefer that it should be of a lower strain, so itbe genuine and equal, than that it should be glittering and unsteady. Iwish it to be sound and sweet, and not to need diet and bleeding. I askprimary evidence that you are a man, and refuse this appeal from the manto his actions. I know that for myself it makes no difference whetherI do or forbear those actions which are reckoned excellent. I cannotconsent to pay for a privilege where I have intrinsic right. Few andmean as my gifts may be, I actually am, and do not need for my ownassurance or the assurance of my fellows any secondary testimony.
What I must do is all that concerns me, not what the people think. Thisrule, equally arduous in actual and in intellectual life, may serve forthe whole distinction between greatness and meanness. It is the harderbecause you will always find those who think they know what is yourduty better than you know it. It is easy in the world to live after theworld's opinion; it is easy in solitude to live after our own; butthe great man is he who in the midst of the crowd keeps with perfectsweetness the independence of solitude.
The objection to conforming to usages that have become dead to you isthat it scatters your force. It loses your time and blurs the impressionof your character. If you maintain a dead church, contribute to a deadBible-society, vote with a great party either for the government oragainst it, spread your table like base housekeepers,--under all thesescreens I have difficulty to detect the precise man you are: and ofcourse so much force is withdrawn from your proper life. But do yourwork, and I shall know you. Do your work, and you shall reinforceyourself. A man must consider what a blindman's-buff is this game ofconformity. If I know your sect, I anticipate your argument. I hear apreacher announce for his text and topic the expediency of one of theinstitutions of his church. Do I not know beforehand that not possiblycan he say a new and spontaneous word? Do I not know that with all thisostentation of examining the grounds of the institution he will do nosuch thing? Do I not know that he is pledged to himself not to look butat one side, the permitted side, not as a man, but as a parish minister?He is a retained attorney, and these airs of the bench are the emptiestaffectation. Well, most men have bound their eyes with one or anotherhandkerchief, and attached themselves to some one of these communitiesof opinion. This conformity makes them not false in a few particulars,authors of a few lies, but false in all particulars. Their every truthis not quite true. Their two is not the real two, their four not thereal four; so that every word they say chagrins us and we know not whereto begin to set them right. Meantime nature is not slow to equip us inthe prison-uniform of the party to which we adhere. We come to wearone cut of face and figure, and acquire by degrees the gentlest asinineexpression. There is a mortifying experience in particular, whichdoes not fail to wreak itself also in the general history; I mean "thefoolish face of praise," the forced smile which we put on in companywhere we do not feel at ease in answer to conversation which does notinterest us. The muscles, not spontaneously moved but moved by a lowusurping wilfulness, grow tight about the outline of the face with themost disagreeable sensation.
For nonconformity the world whips you with its displeasure. Andtherefore a man must know how to estimate a sour face. The by-standerslook askance on him in the public street or in the friend's parlor. Ifthis aversation had its origin in contempt and resistance like his ownhe might well go home with a sad countenance; but the sour faces of themultitude, like their sweet faces, have no deep cause, but are put onand off as the wind blows and a newspaper directs. Yet is the discontentof the multitude more formidable than that of the senate and thecollege. It is easy enough for a firm man who knows the world to brookthe rage of the cultivated classes. Their rage is decorous and prudent,for they are timid, as being very vulnerable themselves. But when totheir feminine rage the indignation of the people is added, when theignorant and the poor are aroused, when the unintelligent brute forcethat lies at the bottom of society is made to growl and mow, it needsthe habit of magnanimity and religion to treat it godlike as a trifle ofno concernment.
The other terror that scares us from self-trust is our consistency; areverence for our past act or word because the eyes of others have noother data for computing our orbit than our past acts, and we are loathto disappoint them.
But why should you keep your head over your shoulder? Why drag aboutthis corpse of your memory, lest you contradict somewhat you have statedin this or that public place? Suppose you should contradict yourself;what then? It seems to be a rule of wisdom never to rely on your memoryalone, scarcely even in acts of pure memory, but to bring the past forjudgment into the thousand-eyed present, and live ever in a new day. Inyour metaphysics you have denied personality to the Deity, yet when thedevout motions of the soul come, yield to them heart and life, thoughthey should clothe God with shape and color. Leave your theory, asJoseph his coat in the hand of the harlot, and flee.
A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by littlestatesmen and philosophers and divines. With consistency a great soulhas simply nothing to do. He may as well concern himself with his shadowon the wall. Speak what you think now in hard words and to-morrow speakwhat to-morrow thinks in hard words again, though it contradictevery thing you said to-day.--'Ah, so you shall be sure to bemisunderstood.'--Is it so bad then to be misunderstood? Pythagoras wasmisunderstood, and Socrates, and Jesus, and Luther, and Copernicus,and Galileo, and Newton, and every pure and wise spirit that ever tookflesh. To be great is to be misunderstood.
I suppose no man can violate his nature. All the sallies of his willare rounded in by the law of his being, as the inequalities of Andesand Himmaleh are insignificant in the curve of the sphere. Nor does itmatter how you gauge and try him. A character is like an acrostic orAlexandrian stanza;--read it forward, backward, or across, it stillspells the same thing. In this pleasing contrite wood-life which Godallows me, let me record day by day my honest thought without prospector retrospect, and, I cannot doubt, it will be found symmetrical, thoughI mean it not and see it not. My book should smell of pines and resoundwith the hum of insects. The swallow over my window should interweavethat thread or straw he carries in his bill into my web also. We passfor what we are. Character teaches above our wills. Men imagine thatthey communicate their virtue or vice only by overt actions, and do notsee that virtue or vice emit a breath every moment.
There will be an agreement in whatever variety of actions, so they beeach honest and natural in their hour. For of one will, the actions willbe harmonious, however unlike they seem. These varieties are lost sightof at a little distance, at a little height of thought. One tendencyunites them all. The voyage of the best ship is a zigzag line ofa hundred tacks. See the line from a sufficient distance, and itstraightens itself to the average tendency. Your genuine action willexplain itself and will explain your other genuine actions. Yourconformity explains nothing. Act singly, and what you have already donesingly will justify you now. Greatness appeals to the future. If I canbe firm enough to-day to do right and scorn eyes, I must have done somuch right before as to defend me now. Be it how it will, do right now.Always scorn appearances and you always may. The force of character iscumulative. All the foregone days of virtue work their health into this.What makes the majesty of the heroes of the senate and the field, whichso fills the imagination? The consciousness of a train of great days andvictories behind. They shed an united light on the advancing actor. Heis attended as by a visible escort of angels. That is it which throwsthunder into Chatham's voice, and dignity into Washington's port, andAmerica into Adams's eye. Honor is venerable to us because it is noephemera. It is always ancient virtue. We worship it to-day because itis not of to-day. We love it and pay it homage because it is not atrap for our love and homage, but is self-dependent, self-derived,and therefore of an old immaculate pedigree, even if shown in a youngperson.
I hope in these days we have heard the last of conformity andconsistency. Let the words be gazetted and ridiculous henceforward.Instead of the gong for dinner, let us hear a whistle from the Spartanfife. Let us never bow and apologize more. A great man is coming to eatat my house. I do not wish to please him; I wish that he should wish toplease me. I will stand here for humanity, and though I would make itkind, I would make it true. Let us affront and reprimand the smoothmediocrity and squalid contentment of the times, and hurl in the faceof custom and trade and office, the fact which is the upshot of allhistory, that there is a great responsible Thinker and Actor workingwherever a man works; that a true man belongs to no other time or place,but is the centre of things. Where he is, there is nature. He measuresyou and all men and all events. Ordinarily, every body in societyreminds us of somewhat else, or of some other person. Character,reality, reminds you of nothing else; it takes place of the wholecreation. The man must be so much that he must make all circumstancesindifferent. Every true man is a cause, a country, and an age;requires infinite spaces and numbers and time fully to accomplish hisdesign;--and posterity seem to follow his steps as a train of clients. Aman Caesar is born, and for ages after we have a Roman Empire. Christ isborn, and millions of minds so grow and cleave to his genius that he isconfounded with virtue and the possible of man. An institution is thelengthened shadow of one man; as, Monachism, of the Hermit Antony;the Reformation, of Luther; Quakerism, of Fox; Methodism, of Wesley;Abolition, of Clarkson. Scipio, Milton called "the height of Rome";and all history Resolves itself very easily into the biography of a fewstout and earnest persons.
Let a man then know his worth, and keep things under his feet. Let himnot peep or steal, or skulk up and down with the air of a charity-boy, abastard, or an interloper in the world which exists for him. But theman in the street, finding no worth in himself which corresponds to theforce which built a tower or sculptured a marble god, feels poor whenhe looks on these. To him a palace, a statue, or a costly book have analien and forbidding air, much like a gay equipage, and seem to say likethat, 'Who are you, Sir?' Yet they all are his, suitors for hisnotice, petitioners to his faculties that they will come out and takepossession. The picture waits for my verdict; it is not to command me,but I am to settle its claims to praise. That popular fable of the sotwho was picked up dead drunk in the street, carried to the duke's house,washed and dressed and laid in the duke's bed, and, on his waking,treated with all obsequious ceremony like the duke, and assured that hehad been insane, owes its popularity to the fact that it symbolizes sowell the state of man, who is in the world a sort of sot, but now andthen wakes up, exercises his reason and finds himself a true prince.
Our reading is mendicant and sycophantic. In history our imaginationplays us false. Kingdom and lordship, power and estate, are a gaudiervocabulary than private John and Edward in a small house and commonday's work; but the things of life are the same to both; the sum totalof both is the same. Why all this deference to Alfred and Scanderbeg andGustavus? Suppose they were virtuous; did they wear out virtue? As greata stake depends on your private act to-day, as followed their publicand renowned steps. When private men shall act with original views,the lustre will be transferred from the actions of kings to those ofgentlemen.
The world has been instructed by its kings, who have so magnetized theeyes of nations. It has been taught by this colossal symbol the mutualreverence that is due from man to man. The joyful loyalty with which menhave everywhere suffered the king, the noble, or the great proprietorto walk among them by a law of his own, make his own scale of men andthings and reverse theirs, pay for benefits not with money but withhonor, and represent the law in his person, was the hieroglyphic bywhich they obscurely signified their consciousness of their own rightand comeliness, the right of every man.
The magnetism which all original action exerts is explained when weinquire the reason of self-trust. Who is the Trustee? What is theaboriginal Self, on which a universal reliance may be grounded? What isthe nature and power of that science-baffling star, without parallax,without calculable elements, which shoots a ray of beauty even intotrivial and impure actions, if the least mark of independence appear?The inquiry leads us to that source, at once the essence of genius, ofvirtue, and of life, which we call Spontaneity or Instinct. We denotethis primary wisdom as Intuition, whilst all later teachings aretuitions. In that deep force, the last fact behind which analysis cannotgo, all things find their common origin. For the sense of being whichin calm hours rises, we know not how, in the soul, is not diverse fromthings, from space, from light, from time, from man, but one with themand proceeds obviously from the same source whence their life andbeing also proceed. We first share the life by which things exist andafterwards see them as appearances in nature and forget that we haveshared their cause. Here is the fountain of action and of thought. Hereare the lungs of that inspiration which giveth man wisdom and whichcannot be denied without impiety and atheism. We lie in the lap ofimmense intelligence, which makes us receivers of its truth and organsof its activity. When we discern justice, when we discern truth, we donothing of ourselves, but allow a passage to its beams. If we ask whencethis comes, if we seek to pry into the soul that causes, all philosophyis at fault. Its presence or its absence is all we can affirm. Every mandiscriminates between the voluntary acts of his mind and his involuntaryperceptions, and knows that to his involuntary perceptions a perfectfaith is due. He may err in the expression of them, but he knows thatthese things are so, like day and night, not to be disputed. My wilfulactions and acquisitions are but roving;--the idlest reverie, thefaintest native emotion, command my curiosity and respect. Thoughtlesspeople contradict as readily the statement of perceptions as ofopinions, or rather much more readily; for they do not distinguishbetween perception and notion. They fancy that I choose to see thisor that thing. But perception is not whimsical, but fatal. If I seea trait, my children will see it after me, and in course of time allmankind,--although it may chance that no one has seen it before me. Formy perception of it is as much a fact as the sun.
The relations of the soul to the divine spirit are so pure that it isprofane to seek to interpose helps. It must be that when God speaketh heshould communicate, not one thing, but all things; should fill the worldwith his voice; should scatter forth light, nature, time, souls, fromthe centre of the present thought; and new date and new create thewhole. Whenever a mind is simple and receives a divine wisdom, oldthings pass away,--means, teachers, texts, temples fall; it lives now,and absorbs past and future into the present hour. All things aremade sacred by relation to it,--one as much as another. All things aredissolved to their centre by their cause, and in the universal miraclepetty and particular miracles disappear. If therefore a man claims toknow and speak of God and carries you backward to the phraseology ofsome old mouldered nation in another country, in another world, believehim not. Is the acorn better than the oak which is its fulness andcompletion? Is the parent better than the child into whom he has casthis ripened being? Whence then this worship of the past? The centuriesare conspirators against the sanity and authority of the soul. Time andspace are but physiological colors which the eye makes, but the soul islight: where it is, is day; where it was, is night; and history isan impertinence and an injury if it be any thing more than a cheerfulapologue or parable of my being and becoming.
Man is timid and apologetic; he is no longer upright; he dares not say'I think,' 'I am,' but quotes some saint or sage. He is ashamed beforethe blade of grass or the blowing rose. These roses under my window makeno reference to former roses or to better ones; they are for what theyare; they exist with God to-day. There is no time to them. There issimply the rose; it is perfect in every moment of its existence. Beforea leaf-bud has burst, its whole life acts; in the full-blown flowerthere is no more; in the leafless root there is no less. Its natureis satisfied and it satisfies nature in all moments alike. But manpostpones or remembers; he does not live in the present, but withreverted eye laments the past, or, heedless of the riches that surroundhim, stands on tiptoe to foresee the future. He cannot be happy andstrong until he too lives with nature in the present, above time.
This should be plain enough. Yet see what strong intellects dare notyet hear God himself unless he speak the phraseology of I know not whatDavid, or Jeremiah, or Paul. We shall not always set so great a price ona few texts, on a few lives. We are like children who repeat by rote thesentences of grandames and tutors, and, as they grow older, of the menof talents and character they chance to see,--painfully recollectingthe exact words they spoke; afterwards, when they come into the point ofview which those had who uttered these sayings, they understand them andare willing to let the words go; for at any time they can use words asgood when occasion comes. If we live truly, we shall see truly. It is aseasy for the strong man to be strong, as it is for the weak to be weak.When we have new perception, we shall gladly disburden the memory of itshoarded treasures as old rubbish. When a man lives with God, his voiceshall be as sweet as the murmur of the brook and the rustle of the corn.
And now at last the highest truth on this subject remains unsaid;probably cannot be said; for all that we say is the far-off rememberingof the intuition. That thought by what I can now nearest approach to sayit, is this. When good is near you, when you have life in yourself,it is not by any known or accustomed way; you shall not discern thefootprints of any other; you shall not see the face of man; you shallnot hear any name;--the way, the thought, the good shall be whollystrange and new. It shall exclude example and experience. You takethe way from man, not to man. All persons that ever existed are itsforgotten ministers. Fear and hope are alike beneath it. There issomewhat low even in hope. In the hour of vision there is nothing thatcan be called gratitude, nor properly joy. The soul raised over passionbeholds identity and eternal causation, perceives the self-existence ofTruth and Right, and calms itself with knowing that all things go well.Vast spaces of nature, the Atlantic Ocean, the South Sea; long intervalsof time, years, centuries, are of no account. This which I think andfeel underlay every former state of life and circumstances, as it doesunderlie my present, and what is called life, and what is called death.
Life only avails, not the having lived. Power ceases in the instantof repose; it resides in the moment of transition from a past to a newstate, in the shooting of the gulf, in the darting to an aim. This onefact the world hates; that the soul becomes; for that for ever degradesthe past, turns all riches to poverty, all reputation to a shame,confounds the saint with the rogue, shoves Jesus and Judas equallyaside. Why then do we prate of self-reliance? Inasmuch as the soul ispresent there will be power not confident but agent. To talk of relianceis a poor external way of speaking. Speak rather of that which reliesbecause it works and is. Who has more obedience than I masters me,though he should not raise his finger. Round him I must revolve by thegravitation of spirits. We fancy it rhetoric when we speak of eminentvirtue. We do not yet see that virtue is Height, and that a man ora company of men, plastic and permeable to principles, by the law ofnature must overpower and ride all cities, nations, kings, rich men,poets, who are not.
This is the ultimate fact which we so quickly reach on this, as on everytopic, the resolution of all into the ever-blessed ONE. Self-existenceis the attribute of the Supreme Cause, and it constitutes the measure ofgood by the degree in which it enters into all lower forms. All thingsreal are so by so much virtue as they contain. Commerce, husbandry,hunting, whaling, war, eloquence, personal weight, are somewhat, andengage my respect as examples of its presence and impure action. I seethe same law working in nature for conservation and growth. Power is, innature, the essential measure of right. Nature suffers nothing to remainin her kingdoms which cannot help itself. The genesis and maturation ofa planet, its poise and orbit, the bended tree recovering itself fromthe strong wind, the vital resources of every animal and vegetable, aredemonstrations of the self-sufficing and therefore self-relying soul.
Thus all concentrates: let us not rove; let us sit at home with thecause. Let us stun and astonish the intruding rabble of men and booksand institutions, by a simple declaration of the divine fact. Bid theinvaders take the shoes from off their feet, for God is here within. Letour simplicity judge them, and our docility to our own law demonstratethe poverty of nature and fortune beside our native riches.
But now we are a mob. Man does not stand in awe of man, nor is hisgenius admonished to stay at home, to put itself in communication withthe internal ocean, but it goes abroad to beg a cup of water of theurns of other men. We must go alone. I like the silent church before theservice begins, better than any preaching. How far off, how cool, howchaste the persons look, begirt each one with a precinct or sanctuary!So let us always sit. Why should we assume the faults of our friend, orwife, or father, or child, because they sit around our hearth, or aresaid to have the same blood? All men have my blood and I have all men's.Not for that will I adopt their petulance or folly, even to the extentof being ashamed of it. But your isolation must not be mechanical, butspiritual, that is, must be elevation. At times the whole world seems tobe in conspiracy to importune you with emphatic trifles. Friend, client,child, sickness, fear, want, charity, all knock at once at thy closetdoor and say,--'Come out unto us.' But keep thy state; come not intotheir confusion. The power men possess to annoy me I give them by a weakcuriosity. No man can come near me but through my act. "What we lovethat we have, but by desire we bereave ourselves of the love."
If we cannot at once rise to the sanctities of obedience and faith, letus at least resist our temptations; let us enter into the state of warand wake Thor and Woden, courage and constancy, in our Saxon breasts.This is to be done in our smooth times by speaking the truth. Check thislying hospitality and lying affection. Live no longer to the expectationof these deceived and deceiving people with whom we converse. Say tothem, 'O father, O mother, O wife, O brother, O friend, I have livedwith you after appearances hitherto. Henceforward I am the truth's. Beit known unto you that henceforward I obey no law less than the eternallaw. I will have no covenants but proximities. I shall endeavour tonourish my parents, to support my family, to be the chaste husband ofone wife,--but these relations I must fill after a new and unprecedentedway. I appeal from your customs. I must be myself. I cannot break myselfany longer for you, or you. If you can love me for what I am, we shallbe the happier. If you cannot, I will still seek to deserve that youshould. I will not hide my tastes or aversions. I will so trust thatwhat is deep is holy, that I will do strongly before the sun and moonwhatever inly rejoices me and the heart appoints. If you are noble,I will love you: if you are not, I will not hurt you and myself byhypocritical attentions. If you are true, but not in the same truthwith me, cleave to your companions; I will seek my own. I do this notselfishly but humbly and truly. It is alike your interest, and mine, andall men's, however long we have dwelt in lies, to live in truth. Doesthis sound harsh to-day? You will soon love what is dictated by yournature as well as mine, and if we follow the truth it will bring usout safe at last.'--But so may you give these friends pain. Yes, but Icannot sell my liberty and my power, to save their sensibility. Besides,all persons have their moments of reason, when they look out into theregion of absolute truth; then will they justify me and do the samething.
The populace think that your rejection of popular standards is arejection of all standard, and mere antinomianism; and the boldsensualist will use the name of philosophy to gild his crimes. But thelaw of consciousness abides. There are two confessionals, in one or theother of which we must be shriven. You may fulfil your round of dutiesby clearing yourself in the direct, or in the reflex way. Considerwhether you have satisfied your relations to father, mother, cousin,neighbor, town, cat, and dog; whether any of these can upbraid you. ButI may also neglect this reflex standard and absolve me to myself. I havemy own stern claims and perfect circle. It denies the name of duty tomany offices that are called duties. But if I can discharge its debts itenables me to dispense with the popular code. If any one imagines thatthis law is lax, let him keep its commandment one day.
And truly it demands something godlike in him who has cast off thecommon motives of humanity and has ventured to trust himself for ataskmaster. High be his heart, faithful his will, clear his sight, thathe may in good earnest be doctrine, society, law, to himself, that asimple purpose may be to him as strong as iron necessity is to others!
If any man consider the present aspects of what is called by distinctionsociety, he will see the need of these ethics. The sinew and heartof man seem to be drawn out, and we are become timorous, despondingwhimperers. We are afraid of truth, afraid of fortune, afraid of deathand afraid of each other. Our age yields no great and perfect persons.We want men and women who shall renovate life and our social state, butwe see that most natures are insolvent, cannot satisfy their own wants,have an ambition out of all proportion to their practical force and dolean and beg day and night continually. Our housekeeping is mendicant,our arts, our occupations, our marriages, our religion we have notchosen, but society has chosen for us. We are parlor soldiers. We shunthe rugged battle of fate, where strength is born.
If our young men miscarry in their first enterprises they lose allheart. If the young merchant fails, men say he is ruined. If the finestgenius studies at one of our colleges and is not installed in an officewithin one year afterwards in the cities or suburbs of Boston or NewYork, it seems to his friends and to himself that he is right in beingdisheartened and in complaining the rest of his life. A sturdy lad fromNew Hampshire or Vermont, who in turn tries all the professions,who teams it, farms it, peddles, keeps a school, preaches, editsa newspaper, goes to Congress, buys a township, and so forth, insuccessive years, and always like a cat falls on his feet, is worth ahundred of these city dolls. He walks abreast with his days and feels noshame in not 'studying a profession,' for he does not postpone his life,but lives already. He has not one chance, but a hundred chances. Leta Stoic open the resources of man and tell men they are not leaningwillows, but can and must detach themselves; that with the exercise ofself-trust, new powers shall appear; that a man is the word made flesh,born to shed healing to the nations; that he should be ashamed of ourcompassion, and that the moment he acts from himself, tossing the laws,the books, idolatries and customs out of the window, we pity him no morebut thank and revere him;--and that teacher shall restore the life ofman to splendor and make his name dear to all history.
It is easy to see that a greater self-reliance must work a revolutionin all the offices and relations of men; in their religion; in theireducation; in their pursuits; their modes of living; their association;in their property; in their speculative views.
1. In what prayers do men allow themselves! That which they call a holyoffice is not so much as brave and manly. Prayer looks abroad and asksfor some foreign addition to come through some foreign virtue, and losesitself in endless mazes of natural and supernatural, and mediatorial andmiraculous. Prayer that craves a particular commodity, any thing lessthan all good, is vicious. Prayer is the contemplation of the facts oflife from the highest point of view. It is the soliloquy of a beholdingand jubilant soul. It is the spirit of God pronouncing his works good.But prayer as a means to effect a private end is meanness and theft. Itsupposes dualism and not unity in nature and consciousness. As soon asthe man is at one with God, he will not beg. He will then see prayer inall action. The prayer of the farmer kneeling in his field to weed it,the prayer of the rower kneeling with the stroke of his oar, are trueprayers heard throughout nature, though for cheap ends. Caratach, inFletcher's Bonduca, when admonished to inquire the mind of the godAudate, replies,--
 "His hidden meaning lies in our endeavors;  Our valors are our best gods."
Another sort of false prayers are our regrets. Discontent is the wantof self-reliance: it is infirmity of will. Regret calamities if you canthereby help the sufferer; if not, attend your own work and already theevil begins to be repaired. Our sympathy is just as base. We come tothem who weep foolishly and sit down and cry for company, instead ofimparting to them truth and health in rough electric shocks, puttingthem once more in communication with their own reason. The secret offortune is joy in our hands. Welcome evermore to gods and men is theself-helping man. For him all doors are flung wide; him all tonguesgreet, all honors crown, all eyes follow with desire. Our love goes outto him and embraces him because he did not need it. We solicitously andapologetically caress and celebrate him because he held on his way andscorned our disapprobation. The gods love him because men hated him."To the persevering mortal," said Zoroaster, "the blessed Immortals areswift."
As men's prayers are a disease of the will, so are their creeds adisease of the intellect. They say with those foolish Israelites, 'Letnot God speak to us, lest we die. Speak thou, speak any man with us, andwe will obey.' Everywhere I am hindered of meeting God in my brother,because he has shut his own temple doors and recites fables merely ofhis brother's, or his brother's brother's God. Every new mind is a newclassification. If it prove a mind of uncommon activity and power,a Locke, a Lavoisier, a Hutton, a Bentham, a Fourier, it imposes itsclassification on other men, and lo! a new system. In proportion to thedepth of the thought, and so to the number of the objects it touchesand brings within reach of the pupil, is his complacency. But chiefly isthis apparent in creeds and churches, which are also classifications ofsome powerful mind acting on the elemental thought of duty, and man'srelation to the Highest. Such is Calvinism, Quakerism, Swedenborgism.The pupil takes the same delight in subordinating every thing to the newterminology as a girl who has just learned botany in seeing a new earthand new seasons thereby. It will happen for a time that the pupil willfind his intellectual power has grown by the study of his master's mind.But in all unbalanced minds the classification is idolized, passes forthe end and not for a speedily exhaustible means, so that the walls ofthe system blend to their eye in the remote horizon with the walls ofthe universe; the luminaries of heaven seem to them hung on the archtheir master built. They cannot imagine how you aliens have any right tosee,--how you can see; 'It must be somehow that you stole the light fromus.' They do not yet perceive that light, unsystematic, indomitable,will break into any cabin, even into theirs. Let them chirp awhile andcall it their own. If they are honest and do well, presently their neatnew pinfold will be too strait and low, will crack, will lean, will rotand vanish, and the immortal light, all young and joyful, million-orbed,million-colored, will beam over the universe as on the first morning.
2. It is for want of self-culture that the superstition of Travelling,whose idols are Italy, England, Egypt, retains its fascination for alleducated Americans. They who made England, Italy, or Greece venerable inthe imagination did so by sticking fast where they were, like an axis ofthe earth. In manly hours we feel that duty is our place. The soul isno traveller; the wise man stays at home, and when his necessities, hisduties, on any occasion call him from his house, or into foreign lands,he is at home still and shall make men sensible by the expression ofhis countenance that he goes, the missionary of wisdom and virtue, andvisits cities and men like a sovereign and not like an interloper or avalet.
I have no churlish objection to the circumnavigation of the globe forthe purposes of art, of study, and benevolence, so that the man is firstdomesticated, or does not go abroad with the hope of finding somewhatgreater than he knows. He who travels to be amused, or to get somewhatwhich he does not carry, travels away from himself, and grows old evenin youth among old things. In Thebes, in Palmyra, his will and mind havebecome old and dilapidated as they. He carries ruins to ruins.
Travelling is a fool's paradise. Our first journeys discover to us theindifference of places. At home I dream that at Naples, at Rome, I canbe intoxicated with beauty and lose my sadness. I pack my trunk, embracemy friends, embark on the sea and at last wake up in Naples, and therebeside me is the stern fact, the sad self, unrelenting, identical,that I fled from. I seek the Vatican and the palaces. I affect to beintoxicated with sights and suggestions, but I am not intoxicated. Mygiant goes with me wherever I go.
3. But the rage of travelling is a symptom of a deeper unsoundnessaffecting the whole intellectual action. The intellect is vagabond, andour system of education fosters restlessness. Our minds travel when ourbodies are forced to stay at home. We imitate; and what is imitation butthe travelling of the mind? Our houses are built with foreign taste; ourshelves are garnished with foreign ornaments; our opinions, our tastes,our faculties, lean, and follow the Past and the Distant. The soulcreated the arts wherever they have flourished. It was in his own mindthat the artist sought his model. It was an application of his ownthought to the thing to be done and the conditions to be observed. Andwhy need we copy the Doric or the Gothic model? Beauty, convenience,grandeur of thought and quaint expression are as near to us as to any,and if the American artist will study with hope and love the precisething to be done by him, considering the climate, the soil, thelength of the day, the wants of the people, the habit and form ofthe government, he will create a house in which all these will findthemselves fitted, and taste and sentiment will be satisfied also.
Insist on yourself; never imitate. Your own gift you can present everymoment with the cumulative force of a whole life's cultivation; butof the adopted talent of another you have only an extemporaneous halfpossession. That which each can do best, none but his Maker canteach him. No man yet knows what it is, nor can, till that person hasexhibited it. Where is the master who could have taught Shakspeare?Where is the master who could have instructed Franklin, or Washington,or Bacon, or Newton? Every great man is a unique. The Scipionism ofScipio is precisely that part he could not borrow. Shakspeare will neverbe made by the study of Shakspeare. Do that which is assigned you, andyou cannot hope too much or dare too much. There is at this momentfor you an utterance brave and grand as that of the colossal chisel ofPhidias, or trowel of the Egyptians, or the pen of Moses or Dante, butdifferent from all these. Not possibly will the soul, all rich, alleloquent, with thousand-cloven tongue, deign to repeat itself; but ifyou can hear what these patriarchs say, surely you can reply to them inthe same pitch of voice; for the ear and the tongue are two organs ofone nature. Abide in the simple and noble regions of thy life, obey thyheart and thou shalt reproduce the Foreworld again.
4. As our Religion, our Education, our Art look abroad, so does ourspirit of society. All men plume themselves on the improvement ofsociety, and no man improves.
Society never advances. It recedes as fast on one side as it gainson the other. It undergoes continual changes; it is barbarous, it iscivilized, it is christianized, it is rich, it is scientific; but thischange is not amelioration. For every thing that is given somethingis taken. Society acquires new arts and loses old instincts. What acontrast between the well-clad, reading, writing, thinking American,with a watch, a pencil and a bill of exchange in his pocket, and thenaked New Zealander, whose property is a club, a spear, a mat and anundivided twentieth of a shed to sleep under! But compare the health ofthe two men and you shall see that the white man has lost his aboriginalstrength. If the traveller tell us truly, strike the savage with a broadaxe and in a day or two the flesh shall unite and heal as if you struckthe blow into soft pitch, and the same blow shall send the white to hisgrave.
The civilized man has built a coach, but has lost the use of his feet.He is supported on crutches, but lacks so much support of muscle. He hasa fine Geneva watch, but he fails of the skill to tell the hour bythe sun. A Greenwich nautical almanac he has, and so being sure of theinformation when he wants it, the man in the street does not know a starin the sky. The solstice he does not observe; the equinox he knows aslittle; and the whole bright calendar of the year is without a dial inhis mind. His note-books impair his memory; his libraries overload hiswit; the insurance-office increases the number of accidents; and it maybe a question whether machinery does not encumber; whether we havenot lost by refinement some energy, by a Christianity entrenched inestablishments and forms some vigor of wild virtue. For every Stoic wasa Stoic; but in Christendom where is the Christian?
There is no more deviation in the moral standard than in the standardof height or bulk. No greater men are now than ever were. A singularequality may be observed between the great men of the first and of thelast ages; nor can all the science, art, religion, and philosophy of thenineteenth century avail to educate greater men than Plutarch'sheroes, three or four and twenty centuries ago. Not in time is the raceprogressive. Phocion, Socrates, Anaxagoras, Diogenes, are great men, butthey leave no class. He who is really of their class will not be calledby their name, but will be his own man, and in his turn the founder of asect. The arts and inventions of each period are only its costume anddo not invigorate men. The harm of the improved machinery may compensateits good. Hudson and Behring accomplished so much in their fishing-boatsas to astonish Parry and Franklin, whose equipment exhausted theresources of science and art. Galileo, with an opera-glass, discovered amore splendid series of celestial phenomena than any one since. Columbusfound the New World in an undecked boat. It is curious to see theperiodical disuse and perishing of means and machinery which wereintroduced with loud laudation a few years or centuries before. Thegreat genius returns to essential man. We reckoned the improvements ofthe art of war among the triumphs of science, and yet Napoleon conqueredEurope by the bivouac, which consisted of falling back on naked valorand disencumbering it of all aids. The Emperor held it impossible tomake a perfect army, says Las Cases, "without abolishing our arms,magazines, commissaries and carriages, until, in imitation of the Romancustom, the soldier should receive his supply of corn, grind it in hishand-mill, and bake his bread himself."
Society is a wave. The wave moves onward, but the water of which it iscomposed does not. The same particle does not rise from the valleyto the ridge. Its unity is only phenomenal. The persons who make up anation to-day, next year die, and their experience with them.
And so the reliance on Property, including the reliance on governmentswhich protect it, is the want of self-reliance. Men have looked awayfrom themselves and at things so long that they have come to esteem thereligious, learned and civil institutions as guards of property, andthey deprecate assaults on these, because they feel them to be assaultson property. They measure their esteem of each other by what each has,and not by what each is. But a cultivated man becomes ashamed of hisproperty, out of new respect for his nature. Especially he hates whathe has if he see that it is accidental,--came to him by inheritance, orgift, or crime; then he feels that it is not having; it does not belongto him, has no root in him and merely lies there because no revolutionor no robber takes it away. But that which a man is, does always bynecessity acquire, and what the man acquires is living property, whichdoes not wait the beck of rulers, or mobs, or revolutions, or fire, orstorm, or bankruptcies, but perpetually renews itself wherever the manbreathes. "Thy lot or portion of life," said the Caliph Ali, "is seekingafter thee; therefore be at rest from seeking after it." Our dependenceon these foreign goods leads us to our slavish respect for numbers.The political parties meet in numerous conventions; the greater theconcourse and with each new uproar of announcement, The delegation fromEssex! The Democrats from New Hampshire! The Whigs of Maine! the youngpatriot feels himself stronger than before by a new thousand of eyesand arms. In like manner the reformers summon conventions and vote andresolve in multitude. Not so, O friends! will the God deign to enter andinhabit you, but by a method precisely the reverse. It is only as aman puts off all foreign support and stands alone that I see him to bestrong and to prevail. He is weaker by every recruit to his banner. Isnot a man better than a town? Ask nothing of men, and, in the endlessmutation, thou only firm column must presently appear the upholder ofall that surrounds thee. He who knows that power is inborn, that he isweak because he has looked for good out of him and elsewhere, and soperceiving, throws himself unhesitatingly on his thought, instantlyrights himself, stands in the erect position, commands his limbs, worksmiracles; just as a man who stands on his feet is stronger than a manwho stands on his head.
So use all that is called Fortune. Most men gamble with her, and gainall, and lose all, as her wheel rolls. But do thou leave as unlawfulthese winnings, and deal with Cause and Effect, the chancellors of God.In the Will work and acquire, and thou hast chained the wheel of Chance,and shalt sit hereafter out of fear from her rotations. A politicalvictory, a rise of rents, the recovery of your sick or the return ofyour absent friend, or some other favorable event raises your spirits,and you think good days are preparing for you. Do not believe it.Nothing can bring you peace but yourself. Nothing can bring you peacebut the triumph of principles.
*****

     COMPENSATION.
     The wings of Time are black and white,     Pied with morning and with night.     Mountain tall and ocean deep     Trembling balance duly keep.     In changing moon, in tidal wave,     Glows the feud of Want and Have.     Gauge of more and less through space     Electric star and pencil plays.     The lonely Earth amid the balls     That hurry through the eternal halls,     A makeweight flying to the void,     Supplemental asteroid,     Or compensatory spark,     Shoots across the neutral Dark.
     Man's the elm, and Wealth the vine,     Stanch and strong the tendrils twine:     Though the frail ringlets thee deceive,     None from its stock that vine can reave.     Fear not, then, thou child infirm,     There's no god dare wrong a worm.     Laurel crowns cleave to deserts     And power to him who power exerts;     Hast not thy share? On winged feet,     Lo! it rushes thee to meet;     And all that Nature made thy own,     Floating in air or pent in stone,     Will rive the hills and swim the sea     And, like thy shadow, follow thee.



III. COMPENSATION.
Ever since I was a boy I have wished to write a discourse onCompensation; for it seemed to me when very young that on this subjectlife was ahead of theology and the people knew more than the preacherstaught. The documents too from which the doctrine is to be drawn,charmed my fancy by their endless variety, and lay always before me,even in sleep; for they are the tools in our hands, the bread in ourbasket, the transactions of the street, the farm and the dwelling-house;greetings, relations, debts and credits, the influence of character, thenature and endowment of all men. It seemed to me also that in it mightbe shown men a ray of divinity, the present action of the soul of thisworld, clean from all vestige of tradition; and so the heart of manmight be bathed by an inundation of eternal love, conversing with thatwhich he knows was always and always must be, because it really is now.It appeared moreover that if this doctrine could be stated in termswith any resemblance to those bright intuitions in which this truthis sometimes revealed to us, it would be a star in many dark hours andcrooked passages in our journey, that would not suffer us to lose ourway.
I was lately confirmed in these desires by hearing a sermon at church.The preacher, a man esteemed for his orthodoxy, unfolded in the ordinarymanner the doctrine of the Last Judgment. He assumed that judgment isnot executed in this world; that the wicked are successful; that thegood are miserable; and then urged from reason and from Scripture acompensation to be made to both parties in the next life. No offenceappeared to be taken by the congregation at this doctrine. As far as Icould observe when the meeting broke up they separated without remark onthe sermon.
Yet what was the import of this teaching? What did the preacher meanby saying that the good are miserable in the present life? Was it thathouses and lands, offices, wine, horses, dress, luxury, are had byunprincipled men, whilst the saints are poor and despised; and that acompensation is to be made to these last hereafter, by giving them thelike gratifications another day,--bank-stock and doubloons, venison andchampagne? This must be the compensation intended; for what else? Is itthat they are to have leave to pray and praise? to love and serve men?Why, that they can do now. The legitimate inference the disciplewould draw was,--'We are to have such a good time as the sinners havenow';--or, to push it to its extreme import,--'You sin now; we shallsin by and by; we would sin now, if we could; not being successful, weexpect our revenge to-morrow.'
The fallacy lay in the immense concession that the bad are successful;that justice is not done now. The blindness of the preacher consisted indeferring to the base estimate of the market of what constitutes a manlysuccess, instead of confronting and convicting the world from the truth;announcing the presence of the soul; the omnipotence of the will; and soestablishing the standard of good and ill, of success and falsehood.
I find a similar base tone in the popular religious works of the day andthe same doctrines assumed by the literary men when occasionally theytreat the related topics. I think that our popular theology hasgained in decorum, and not in principle, over the superstitions it hasdisplaced. But men are better than their theology. Their daily lifegives it the lie. Every ingenuous and aspiring soul leaves the doctrinebehind him in his own experience, and all men feel sometimes thefalsehood which they cannot demonstrate. For men are wiser than theyknow. That which they hear in schools and pulpits without afterthought,if said in conversation would probably be questioned in silence. If aman dogmatize in a mixed company on Providence and the divine laws, heis answered by a silence which conveys well enough to an observerthe dissatisfaction of the hearer, but his incapacity to make his ownstatement.
I shall attempt in this and the following chapter to record some factsthat indicate the path of the law of Compensation; happy beyond myexpectation if I shall truly draw the smallest arc of this circle.
POLARITY, or action and reaction, we meet in every part of nature; indarkness and light; in heat and cold; in the ebb and flow of waters;in male and female; in the inspiration and expiration of plants andanimals; in the equation of quantity and quality in the fluids ofthe animal body; in the systole and diastole of the heart; in theundulations of fluids, and of sound; in the centrifugal and centripetalgravity; in electricity, galvanism, and chemical affinity. Superinducemagnetism at one end of a needle, the opposite magnetism takes place atthe other end. If the south attracts, the north repels. To empty here,you must condense there. An inevitable dualism bisects nature, so thateach thing is a half, and suggests another thing to make it whole; as,spirit, matter; man, woman; odd, even; subjective, objective; in, out;upper, under; motion, rest; yea, nay.
Whilst the world is thus dual, so is every one of its parts. The entiresystem of things gets represented in every particle. There is somewhatthat resembles the ebb and flow of the sea, day and night, man andwoman, in a single needle of the pine, in a kernel of corn, in eachindividual of every animal tribe. The reaction, so grand in theelements, is repeated within these small boundaries. For example, inthe animal kingdom the physiologist has observed that no creatures arefavorites, but a certain compensation balances every gift and everydefect. A surplusage given to one part is paid out of a reduction fromanother part of the same creature. If the head and neck are enlarged,the trunk and extremities are cut short.
The theory of the mechanic forces is another example. What we gain inpower is lost in time, and the converse. The periodic or compensatingerrors of the planets is another instance. The influences of climate andsoil in political history are another. The cold climate invigorates. Thebarren soil does not breed fevers, crocodiles, tigers or scorpions.
The same dualism underlies the nature and condition of man. Every excesscauses a defect; every defect an excess. Every sweet hath its sour;every evil its good. Every faculty which is a receiver of pleasure hasan equal penalty put on its abuse. It is to answer for its moderationwith its life. For every grain of wit there is a grain of folly. Forevery thing you have missed, you have gained something else; and forevery thing you gain, you lose something. If riches increase, they areincreased that use them. If the gatherer gathers too much, Nature takesout of the man what she puts into his chest; swells the estate, butkills the owner. Nature hates monopolies and exceptions. The waves ofthe sea do not more speedily seek a level from their loftiest tossingthan the varieties of condition tend to equalize themselves. There isalways some levelling circumstance that puts down the overbearing, thestrong, the rich, the fortunate, substantially on the same ground withall others. Is a man too strong and fierce for society and by temper andposition a bad citizen,--a morose ruffian, with a dash of the piratein him?--Nature sends him a troop of pretty sons and daughters who aregetting along in the dame's classes at the village school, and love andfear for them smooths his grim scowl to courtesy. Thus she contrives tointenerate the granite and felspar, takes the boar out and puts the lambin and keeps her balance true.
The farmer imagines power and place are fine things. But the Presidenthas paid dear for his White House. It has commonly cost him all hispeace, and the best of his manly attributes. To preserve for a shorttime so conspicuous an appearance before the world, he is content to eatdust before the real masters who stand erect behind the throne. Or,do men desire the more substantial and permanent grandeur of genius?Neither has this an immunity. He who by force of will or of thought isgreat and overlooks thousands, has the charges of that eminence. Withevery influx of light comes new danger. Has he light? he must bearwitness to the light, and always outrun that sympathy which giveshim such keen satisfaction, by his fidelity to new revelations of theincessant soul. He must hate father and mother, wife and child. Has heall that the world loves and admires and covets?--he must cast behindhim their admiration, and afflict them by faithfulness to his truth, andbecome a byword and a hissing.
This law writes the laws of cities and nations. It is in vain to buildor plot or combine against it. Things refuse to be mismanaged long. Resnolunt diu male administrari. Though no checks to a new evil appear,the checks exist, and will appear. If the government is cruel, thegovernor's life is not safe. If you tax too high, the revenue willyield nothing. If you make the criminal code sanguinary, juries willnot convict. If the law is too mild, private vengeance comes in. Ifthe government is a terrific democracy, the pressure is resisted byan over-charge of energy in the citizen, and life glows with a fiercerflame. The true life and satisfactions of man seem to elude the utmostrigors or felicities of condition and to establish themselves with greatindifferency under all varieties of circumstances. Under all governmentsthe influence of character remains the same,--in Turkey and in NewEngland about alike. Under the primeval despots of Egypt, historyhonestly confesses that man must have been as free as culture could makehim.
These appearances indicate the fact that the universe is representedin every one of its particles. Every thing in nature contains allthe powers of nature. Every thing is made of one hidden stuff; as thenaturalist sees one type under every metamorphosis, and regards a horseas a running man, a fish as a swimming man, a bird as a flying man, atree as a rooted man. Each new form repeats not only the maincharacter of the type, but part for part all the details, all the aims,furtherances, hindrances, energies and whole system of every other.Every occupation, trade, art, transaction, is a compend of the worldand a correlative of every other. Each one is an entire emblem of humanlife; of its good and ill, its trials, its enemies, its course and itsend. And each one must somehow accommodate the whole man and recite allhis destiny.
The world globes itself in a drop of dew. The microscope cannot find theanimalcule which is less perfect for being little. Eyes, ears, taste,smell, motion, resistance, appetite, and organs of reproduction thattake hold on eternity,--all find room to consist in the small creature.So do we put our life into every act. The true doctrine of omnipresenceis that God reappears with all his parts in every moss and cobweb. Thevalue of the universe contrives to throw itself into every point. If thegood is there, so is the evil; if the affinity, so the repulsion; if theforce, so the limitation.
Thus is the universe alive. All things are moral. That soul which withinus is a sentiment, outside of us is a law. We feel its inspiration; outthere in history we can see its fatal strength. "It is in the world, andthe world was made by it." Justice is not postponed. A perfectequity adjusts its balance in all parts of life. Hoi kuboi Dios aeieupiptousi,--The dice of God are always loaded. The world looks like amultiplication-table, or a mathematical equation, which, turn it how youwill, balances itself. Take what figure you will, its exact value, normore nor less, still returns to you. Every secret is told, every crimeis punished, every virtue rewarded, every wrong redressed, in silenceand certainty. What we call retribution is the universal necessity bywhich the whole appears wherever a part appears. If you see smoke, theremust be fire. If you see a hand or a limb, you know that the trunk towhich it belongs is there behind.
Every act rewards itself, or, in other words integrates itself, in atwofold manner; first in the thing, or in real nature; and secondly inthe circumstance, or in apparent nature. Men call the circumstance theretribution. The causal retribution is in the thing and is seen by thesoul. The retribution in the circumstance is seen by the understanding;it is inseparable from the thing, but is often spread over a long timeand so does not become distinct until after many years. The specificstripes may follow late after the offence, but they follow because theyaccompany it. Crime and punishment grow out of one stem. Punishment isa fruit that unsuspected ripens within the flower of the pleasure whichconcealed it. Cause and effect, means and ends, seed and fruit,cannot be severed; for the effect already blooms in the cause, the endpreexists in the means, the fruit in the seed.
Whilst thus the world will be whole and refuses to be disparted, we seekto act partially, to sunder, to appropriate; for example,--to gratifythe senses we sever the pleasure of the senses from the needs ofthe character. The ingenuity of man has always been dedicated to thesolution of one problem,--how to detach the sensual sweet, the sensualstrong, the sensual bright, etc., from the moral sweet, the moral deep,the moral fair; that is, again, to contrive to cut clean off this uppersurface so thin as to leave it bottomless; to get a one end, without another end. The soul says, 'Eat;' the body would feast. The soul says,'The man and woman shall be one flesh and one soul;' the body would jointhe flesh only. The soul says, 'Have dominion over all things to theends of virtue;' the body would have the power over things to its ownends.
The soul strives amain to live and work through all things. It wouldbe the only fact. All things shall be added unto it,--power, pleasure,knowledge, beauty. The particular man aims to be somebody; to set up forhimself; to truck and higgle for a private good; and, in particulars, toride that he may ride; to dress that he may be dressed; to eat that hemay eat; and to govern, that he may be seen. Men seek to be great; theywould have offices, wealth, power, and fame. They think that to be greatis to possess one side of nature,--the sweet, without the other side,the bitter.
This dividing and detaching is steadily counteracted. Up to this dayit must be owned no projector has had the smallest success. The partedwater reunites behind our hand. Pleasure is taken out of pleasantthings, profit out of profitable things, power out of strong things, assoon as we seek to separate them from the whole. We can no more halvethings and get the sensual good, by itself, than we can get an insidethat shall have no outside, or a light without a shadow. "Drive outNature with a fork, she comes running back."
Life invests itself with inevitable conditions, which the unwise seek tododge, which one and another brags that he does not know, that they donot touch him;--but the brag is on his lips, the conditions are in hissoul. If he escapes them in one part they attack him in another morevital part. If he has escaped them in form and in the appearance, itis because he has resisted his life and fled from himself, and theretribution is so much death. So signal is the failure of all attemptsto make this separation of the good from the tax, that the experimentwould not be tried,--since to try it is to be mad,--but for thecircumstance, that when the disease began in the will, of rebellion andseparation, the intellect is at once infected, so that the man ceases tosee God whole in each object, but is able to see the sensual allurementof an object and not see the sensual hurt; he sees the mermaid's headbut not the dragon's tail, and thinks he can cut off that which hewould have from that which he would not have. "How secret art thouwho dwellest in the highest heavens in silence, O thou only great God,sprinkling with an unwearied providence certain penal blindnesses uponsuch as have unbridled desires!" {1}
     1 St. Augustine, Confessions, B. I.
The human soul is true to these facts in the painting of fable, ofhistory, of law, of proverbs, of conversation. It finds a tongue inliterature unawares. Thus the Greeks called Jupiter, Supreme Mind;but having traditionally ascribed to him many base actions, theyinvoluntarily made amends to reason by tying up the hands of so bad agod. He is made as helpless as a king of England. Prometheus knows onesecret which Jove must bargain for; Minerva, another. He cannot get hisown thunders; Minerva keeps the key of them:--
     "Of all the gods, I only know the keys      That ope the solid doors within whose vaults      His thunders sleep."
A plain confession of the in-working of the All and of its moralaim. The Indian mythology ends in the same ethics; and it would seemimpossible for any fable to be invented and get any currency which wasnot moral. Aurora forgot to ask youth for her lover, and though Tithonusis immortal, he is old. Achilles is not quite invulnerable; the sacredwaters did not wash the heel by which Thetis held him. Siegfried, in theNibelungen, is not quite immortal, for a leaf fell on his back whilsthe was bathing in the dragon's blood, and that spot which it covered ismortal. And so it must be. There is a crack in every thing God has made.It would seem there is always this vindictive circumstance stealing inat unawares even into the wild poesy in which the human fancy attemptedto make bold holiday and to shake itself free of the old laws,--thisback-stroke, this kick of the gun, certifying that the law is fatal;that in nature nothing can be given, all things are sold.
This is that ancient doctrine of Nemesis, who keeps watch in theuniverse and lets no offence go unchastised. The Furies they said areattendants on justice, and if the sun in heaven should transgress hispath they would punish him. The poets related that stone walls and ironswords and leathern thongs had an occult sympathy with the wrongs oftheir owners; that the belt which Ajax gave Hector dragged the Trojanhero over the field at the wheels of the car of Achilles, and the swordwhich Hector gave Ajax was that on whose point Ajax fell. They recordedthat when the Thasians erected a statue to Theagenes, a victor in thegames, one of his rivals went to it by night and endeavored to throw itdown by repeated blows, until at last he moved it from its pedestal andwas crushed to death beneath its fall.
This voice of fable has in it somewhat divine. It came from thoughtabove the will of the writer. That is the best part of each writerwhich has nothing private in it; that which he does not know; that whichflowed out of his constitution and not from his too active invention;that which in the study of a single artist you might not easily find,but in the study of many you would abstract as the spirit of them all.Phidias it is not, but the work of man in that early Hellenic world thatI would know. The name and circumstance of Phidias, however convenientfor history, embarrass when we come to the highest criticism. We areto see that which man was tending to do in a given period, and washindered, or, if you will, modified in doing, by the interferingvolitions of Phidias, of Dante, of Shakspeare, the organ whereby man atthe moment wrought.
Still more striking is the expression of this fact in the proverbsof all nations, which are always the literature of reason, or thestatements of an absolute truth without qualification. Proverbs, likethe sacred books of each nation, are the sanctuary of the intuitions.That which the droning world, chained to appearances, will not allow therealist to say in his own words, it will suffer him to say in proverbswithout contradiction. And this law of laws, which the pulpit, thesenate and the college deny, is hourly preached in all markets andworkshops by flights of proverbs, whose teaching is as true and asomnipresent as that of birds and flies.
All things are double, one against another.--Tit for tat; an eye for aneye; a tooth for a tooth; blood for blood; measure for measure; lovefor love.--Give and it shall be given you.--He that watereth shall bewatered himself.--What will you have? quoth God; pay for it and takeit.--Nothing venture, nothing have.--Thou shalt be paid exactly forwhat thou hast done, no more, no less.--Who doth not work shall noteat.--Harm watch, harm catch.--Curses always recoil on the head of himwho imprecates them.--If you put a chain around the neck of a slave,the other end fastens itself around your own.--Bad counsel confounds theadviser.--The Devil is an ass.
It is thus written, because it is thus in life. Our action isovermastered and characterized above our will by the law of nature.We aim at a petty end quite aside from the public good, but our actarranges itself by irresistible magnetism in a line with the poles ofthe world.
A man cannot speak but he judges himself. With his will or against hiswill he draws his portrait to the eye of his companions by every word.Every opinion reacts on him who utters it. It is a thread-ball thrown ata mark, but the other end remains in the thrower's bag. Or rather it isa harpoon hurled at the whale, unwinding, as it flies, a coil of cord inthe boat, and, if the harpoon is not good, or not well thrown, it willgo nigh to cut the steersman in twain or to sink the boat.
You cannot do wrong without suffering wrong. "No man had ever a pointof pride that was not injurious to him," said Burke. The exclusive infashionable life does not see that he excludes himself from enjoyment,in the attempt to appropriate it. The exclusionist in religion does notsee that he shuts the door of heaven on himself, in striving to shut outothers. Treat men as pawns and ninepins and you shall suffer as well asthey. If you leave out their heart, you shall lose your own. The senseswould make things of all persons; of women, of children, of the poor.The vulgar proverb, "I will get it from his purse or get it from hisskin," is sound philosophy.
All infractions of love and equity in our social relations are speedilypunished. They are punished by fear. Whilst I stand in simple relationsto my fellow-man, I have no displeasure in meeting him. We meet as watermeets water, or as two currents of air mix, with perfect diffusion andinterpenetration of nature. But as soon as there is any departure fromsimplicity, and attempt at halfness, or good for me that is not good forhim, my neighbor feels the wrong; he shrinks from me as far as I haveshrunk from him; his eyes no longer seek mine; there is war between us;there is hate in him and fear in me.
All the old abuses in society, universal and particular, all unjustaccumulations of property and power, are avenged in the same manner.Fear is an instructor of great sagacity and the herald of allrevolutions. One thing he teaches, that there is rottenness where heappears. He is a carrion crow, and though you see not well what hehovers for, there is death somewhere. Our property is timid, our lawsare timid, our cultivated classes are timid. Fear for ages has boded andmowed and gibbered over government and property. That obscene bird isnot there for nothing. He indicates great wrongs which must be revised.
Of the like nature is that expectation of change which instantly followsthe suspension of our voluntary activity. The terror of cloudless noon,the emerald of Polycrates, the awe of prosperity, the instinctwhich leads every generous soul to impose on itself tasks of a nobleasceticism and vicarious virtue, are the tremblings of the balance ofjustice through the heart and mind of man.
Experienced men of the world know very well that it is best to pay scotand lot as they go along, and that a man often pays dear for a smallfrugality. The borrower runs in his own debt. Has a man gained any thingwho has received a hundred favors and rendered none? Has he gainedby borrowing, through indolence or cunning, his neighbor's wares, orhorses, or money? There arises on the deed the instant acknowledgmentof benefit on the one part and of debt on the other; that is, ofsuperiority and inferiority. The transaction remains in the memory ofhimself and his neighbor; and every new transaction alters according toits nature their relation to each other. He may soon come to see thathe had better have broken his own bones than to have ridden in hisneighbor's coach, and that "the highest price he can pay for a thing isto ask for it."
A wise man will extend this lesson to all parts of life, and know thatit is the part of prudence to face every claimant and pay every justdemand on your time, your talents, or your heart. Always pay; for firstor last you must pay your entire debt. Persons and events may stand fora time between you and justice, but it is only a postponement. You mustpay at last your own debt. If you are wise you will dread a prosperitywhich only loads you with more. Benefit is the end of nature. Butfor every benefit which you receive, a tax is levied. He is great whoconfers the most benefits. He is base,--and that is the one base thingin the universe,--to receive favors and render none. In the order ofnature we cannot render benefits to those from whom we receive them, oronly seldom. But the benefit we receive must be rendered again, line forline, deed for deed, cent for cent, to somebody. Beware of too much goodstaying in your hand. It will fast corrupt and worm worms. Pay it awayquickly in some sort.
Labor is watched over by the same pitiless laws. Cheapest, say theprudent, is the dearest labor. What we buy in a broom, a mat, a wagon, aknife, is some application of good sense to a common want. It is bestto pay in your land a skilful gardener, or to buy good sense appliedto gardening; in your sailor, good sense applied to navigation; in thehouse, good sense applied to cooking, sewing, serving; in your agent,good sense applied to accounts and affairs. So do you multiply yourpresence, or spread yourself throughout your estate. But because ofthe dual constitution of things, in labor as in life there can be nocheating. The thief steals from himself. The swindler swindles himself.For the real price of labor is knowledge and virtue, whereof wealth andcredit are signs. These signs, like paper money, may be counterfeitedor stolen, but that which they represent, namely, knowledge and virtue,cannot be counterfeited or stolen. These ends of labor cannot beanswered but by real exertions of the mind, and in obedience to puremotives. The cheat, the defaulter, the gambler, cannot extort theknowledge of material and moral nature which his honest care and painsyield to the operative. The law of nature is, Do the thing, and youshall have the Power; but they who do not the thing have not the power.
Human labor, through all its forms, from the sharpening of a stake tothe construction of a city or an epic, is one immense illustration ofthe perfect compensation of the universe. The absolute balance of Giveand Take, the doctrine that every thing has its price,--and if thatprice is not paid, not that thing but something else is obtained, andthat it is impossible to get any thing without its price,--is not lesssublime in the columns of a leger than in the budgets of states, in thelaws of light and darkness, in all the action and reaction of nature. Icannot doubt that the high laws which each man sees implicated in thoseprocesses with which he is conversant, the stern ethics which sparkleon his chisel-edge, which are measured out by his plumb and foot-rule,which stand as manifest in the footing of the shop-bill as in thehistory of a state,--do recommend to him his trade, and though seldomnamed, exalt his business to his imagination.
The league between virtue and nature engages all things to assume ahostile front to vice. The beautiful laws and substances of the worldpersecute and whip the traitor. He finds that things are arranged fortruth and benefit, but there is no den in the wide world to hide arogue. Commit a crime, and the earth is made of glass. Commit a crime,and it seems as if a coat of snow fell on the ground, such as revealsin the woods the track of every partridge and fox and squirrel and mole.You cannot recall the spoken word, you cannot wipe out the foot-track,you cannot draw up the ladder, so as to leave no inlet or clew. Somedamning circumstance always transpires. The laws and substances ofnature,--water, snow, wind, gravitation,--become penalties to the thief.
On the other hand the law holds with equal sureness for all rightaction. Love, and you shall be loved. All love is mathematically just,as much as the two sides of an algebraic equation. The good man hasabsolute good, which like fire turns every thing to its own nature, sothat you cannot do him any harm; but as the royal armies sent againstNapoleon, when he approached cast down their colors and from enemiesbecame friends, so disasters of all kinds, as sickness, offence,poverty, prove benefactors:--
                 "Winds blow and waters roll         Strength to the brave, and power and deity,         Yet in themselves are nothing."
The good are befriended even by weakness and defect. As no man had evera point of pride that was not injurious to him, so no man had ever adefect that was not somewhere made useful to him. The stag in the fableadmired his horns and blamed his feet, but when the hunter came,his feet saved him, and afterwards, caught in the thicket, his hornsdestroyed him. Every man in his lifetime needs to thank his faults. Asno man thoroughly understands a truth until he has contended against it,so no man has a thorough acquaintance with the hindrances or talents ofmen until he has suffered from the one and seen the triumph of the otherover his own want of the same. Has he a defect of temper that unfits himto live in society? Thereby he is driven to entertain himself alone andacquire habits of self-help; and thus, like the wounded oyster, he mendshis shell with pearl.
Our strength grows out of our weakness. The indignation which armsitself with secret forces does not awaken until we are pricked and stungand sorely assailed. A great man is always willing to be little. Whilsthe sits on the cushion of advantages, he goes to sleep. When he ispushed, tormented, defeated, he has a chance to learn something; he hasbeen put on his wits, on his manhood; he has gained facts; learns hisignorance; is cured of the insanity of conceit; has got moderation andreal skill. The wise man throws himself on the side of his assailants.It is more his interest than it is theirs to find his weak point. Thewound cicatrizes and falls off from him like a dead skin and when theywould triumph, lo! he has passed on invulnerable. Blame is safer thanpraise. I hate to be defended in a newspaper. As long as all that issaid is said against me, I feel a certain assurance of success. But assoon as honeyed words of praise are spoken for me I feel as one thatlies unprotected before his enemies. In general, every evil to which wedo not succumb is a benefactor. As the Sandwich Islander believes thatthe strength and valor of the enemy he kills passes into himself, so wegain the strength of the temptation we resist.
The same guards which protect us from disaster, defect, and enmity,defend us, if we will, from selfishness and fraud. Bolts and bars arenot the best of our institutions, nor is shrewdness in trade a mark ofwisdom. Men suffer all their life long under the foolish superstitionthat they can be cheated. But it is as impossible for a man to becheated by any one but himself, as for a thing to be and not to be atthe same time. There is a third silent party to all our bargains. Thenature and soul of things takes on itself the guaranty of the fulfilmentof every contract, so that honest service cannot come to loss. If youserve an ungrateful master, serve him the more. Put God in your debt.Every stroke shall be repaid. The longer The payment is withholden, thebetter for you; for compound interest on compound interest is the rateand usage of this exchequer.
The history of persecution is a history of endeavors to cheat nature, tomake water run up hill, to twist a rope of sand. It makes no differencewhether the actors be many or one, a tyrant or a mob. A mob is a societyof bodies voluntarily bereaving themselves of reason and traversing itswork. The mob is man voluntarily descending to the nature of the beast.Its fit hour of activity is night. Its actions are insane like its wholeconstitution. It persecutes a principle; it would whip a right; it wouldtar and feather justice, by inflicting fire and outrage upon the housesand persons of those who have these. It resembles the prank of boys,who run with fire-engines to put out the ruddy aurora streaming to thestars. The inviolate spirit turns their spite against the wrongdoers.The martyr cannot be dishonored. Every lash inflicted is a tongue offame; every prison, a more illustrious abode; every burned book or houseenlightens the world; every suppressed or expunged word reverberatesthrough the earth from side to side. Hours of sanity and considerationare always arriving to communities, as to individuals, when the truth isseen and the martyrs are justified.
Thus do all things preach the indifferency of circumstances. The man isall. Every thing has two sides, a good and an evil. Every advantage hasits tax. I learn to be content. But the doctrine of compensation isnot the doctrine of indifferency. The thoughtless say, on hearing theserepresentations,--What boots it to do well? there is one event to goodand evil; if I gain any good I must pay for it; if I lose any good Igain some other; all actions are indifferent.
There is a deeper fact in the soul than compensation, to wit, its ownnature. The soul is not a compensation, but a life. The soul is. Underall this running sea of circumstance, whose waters ebb and flow withperfect balance, lies the aboriginal abyss of real Being. Essence,or God, is not a relation or a part, but the whole. Being is the vastaffirmative, excluding negation, self-balanced, and swallowing up allrelations, parts and times within itself. Nature, truth, virtue, arethe influx from thence. Vice is the absence or departure of the same.Nothing, Falsehood, may indeed stand as the great Night or shade onwhich as a background the living universe paints itself forth, but nofact is begotten by it; it cannot work, for it is not. It cannot workany good; it cannot work any harm. It is harm inasmuch as it is worsenot to be than to be.
We feel defrauded of the retribution due to evil acts, because thecriminal adheres to his vice and contumacy and does not come to a crisisor judgment anywhere in visible nature. There is no stunning confutationof his nonsense before men and angels. Has he therefore outwitted thelaw? Inasmuch as he carries the malignity and the lie with him he so fardeceases from nature. In some manner there will be a demonstration ofthe wrong to the understanding also; but, should we not see it, thisdeadly deduction makes square the eternal account.
Neither can it be said, on the other hand, that the gain of rectitudemust be bought by any loss. There is no penalty to virtue; no penaltyto wisdom; they are proper additions of being. In a virtuous action Iproperly am; in a virtuous act I add to the world; I plant into desertsconquered from Chaos and Nothing and see the darkness receding onthe limits of the horizon. There can be no excess to love, none toknowledge, none to beauty, when these attributes are considered in thepurest sense. The soul refuses limits, and always affirms an Optimism,never a Pessimism.
His life is a progress, and not a station. His instinct is trust. Ourinstinct uses "more" and "less" in application to man, of the presenceof the soul, and not of its absence, the brave man is greater than thecoward; the true, the benevolent, the wise, is more a man and not less,than the fool and knave. There is no tax on the good of virtue, forthat is the incoming of God himself, or absolute existence, without anycomparative. Material good has its tax, and if it came without desert orsweat, has no root in me, and the next wind will blow it away. But allthe good of nature is the soul's, and may be had if paid for in nature'slawful coin, that is, by labor which the heart and the head allow. I nolonger wish to meet a good I do not earn, for example to find a pot ofburied gold, knowing that it brings with it new burdens. I do not wishmore external goods,--neither possessions, nor honors, nor powers, norpersons. The gain is apparent; the tax is certain. But there is notax on the knowledge that the compensation exists and that it is notdesirable to dig up treasure. Herein I rejoice with a serene eternalpeace. I contract the boundaries of possible mischief. I learn thewisdom of St. Bernard,--"Nothing can work me damage except myself; theharm that I sustain I carry about with me, and never am a real suffererbut by my own fault."
In the nature of the soul is the compensation for the inequalities ofcondition. The radical tragedy of nature seems to be the distinction ofMore and Less. How can Less not feel the pain; how not feel indignationor malevolence towards More? Look at those who have less faculty, andone feels sad and knows not well what to make of it. He almost shunstheir eye; he fears they will upbraid God. What should they do? Itseems a great injustice. But see the facts nearly and these mountainousinequalities vanish. Love reduces them as the sun melts the iceberg inthe sea. The heart and soul of all men being one, this bitterness of Hisand Mine ceases. His is mine. I am my brother and my brother is me. If Ifeel overshadowed and outdone by great neighbors, I can yet love; I canstill receive; and he that loveth maketh his own the grandeur he loves.Thereby I make the discovery that my brother is my guardian, acting forme with the friendliest designs, and the estate I so admired and enviedis my own. It is the nature of the soul to appropriate all things. Jesusand Shakspeare are fragments of the soul, and by love I conquer andincorporate them in my own conscious domain. His virtue,--is not thatmine? His wit,--if it cannot be made mine, it is not wit.
Such also is the natural history of calamity. The changes which break upat short intervals the prosperity of men are advertisements of a naturewhose law is growth. Every soul is by this intrinsic necessity quittingits whole system of things, its friends and home and laws and faith, asthe shell-fish crawls out of its beautiful but stony case, because it nolonger admits of its growth, and slowly forms a new house. In proportionto the vigor of the individual these revolutions are frequent, until insome happier mind they are incessant and all worldly relations hangvery loosely about him, becoming as it were a transparent fluid membranethrough which the living form is seen, and not, as in most men,an indurated heterogeneous fabric of many dates and of no settledcharacter, in which the man is imprisoned. Then there can beenlargement, and the man of to-day scarcely recognizes the man ofyesterday. And such should be the outward biography of man in time, aputting off of dead circumstances day by day, as he renews his raimentday by day. But to us, in our lapsed estate, resting, not advancing,resisting, not cooperating with the divine expansion, this growth comesby shocks.
We cannot part with our friends. We cannot let our angels go. We do notsee that they only go out that archangels may come in. We are idolatersof the old. We do not believe in the riches of the soul, in its propereternity and omnipresence. We do not believe there is any force into-day to rival or recreate that beautiful yesterday. We linger in theruins of the old tent where once we had bread and shelter and organs,nor believe that the spirit can feed, cover, and nerve us again. Wecannot again find aught so dear, so sweet, so graceful. But we sitand weep in vain. The voice of the Almighty saith, 'Up and onward forevermore!' We cannot stay amid the ruins. Neither will we rely on thenew; and so we walk ever with reverted eyes, like those monsters wholook backwards.
And yet the compensations of calamity are made apparent to theunderstanding also, after long intervals of time. A fever, a mutilation,a cruel disappointment, a loss of wealth, a loss of friends, seems atthe moment unpaid loss, and unpayable. But the sure years reveal thedeep remedial force that underlies all facts. The death of a dearfriend, wife, brother, lover, which seemed nothing but privation,somewhat later assumes the aspect of a guide or genius; for it commonlyoperates revolutions in our way of life, terminates an epoch ofinfancy or of youth which was waiting to be closed, breaks up a wontedoccupation, or a household, or style of living, and allows the formationof new ones more friendly to the growth of character. It permits orconstrains the formation of new acquaintances and the reception of newinfluences that prove of the first importance to the next years; and theman or woman who would have remained a sunny garden-flower, with no roomfor its roots and too much sunshine for its head, by the falling of thewalls and the neglect of the gardener is made the banian of the forest,yielding shade and fruit to wide neighborhoods of men.
*****


     SPIRITUAL LAWS.
     The living Heaven thy prayers respect,     House at once and architect,     Quarrying man's rejected hours,     Builds therewith eternal towers;     Sole and self-commanded works,     Fears not undermining days,     Grows by decays,     And, by the famous might that lurks     In reaction and recoil,     Makes flame to freeze, and ice to boil;     Forging, through swart arms of Offence,     The silver seat of Innocence.



IV. SPIRITUAL LAWS.
When the act of reflection takes place in the mind, when we lookat ourselves in the light of thought, we discover that our life isembosomed in beauty. Behind us, as we go, all things assume pleasingforms, as clouds do far off. Not only things familiar and stale, buteven the tragic and terrible are comely as they take their place in thepictures of memory. The river-bank, the weed at the water-side, theold house, the foolish person, however neglected in the passing, havea grace in the past. Even the corpse that has lain in the chambers hasadded a solemn ornament to the house. The soul will not know eitherdeformity or pain. If in the hours of clear reason we should speak theseverest truth, we should say that we had never made a sacrifice. Inthese hours the mind seems so great that nothing can be taken from usthat seems much. All loss, all pain, is particular; the universe remainsto the heart unhurt. Neither vexations nor calamities abate ourtrust. No man ever stated his griefs as lightly as he might. Allow forexaggeration in the most patient and sorely ridden hack that ever wasdriven. For it is only the finite that has wrought and suffered; theinfinite lies stretched in smiling repose.
The intellectual life may be kept clean and healthful if man will livethe life of nature and not import into his mind difficulties which arenone of his. No man need be perplexed in his speculations. Let him doand say what strictly belongs to him, and though very ignorant of books,his nature shall not yield him any intellectual obstructions and doubts.Our young people are diseased with the theological problems of originalsin, origin of evil, predestination and the like. These never presenteda practical difficulty to any man,--never darkened across any man's roadwho did not go out of his way to seek them. These are the soul's mumpsand measles and whooping-coughs, and those who have not caught themcannot describe their health or prescribe the cure. A simple mind willnot know these enemies. It is quite another thing that he should be ableto give account of his faith and expound to another the theory of hisself-union and freedom. This requires rare gifts. Yet without thisself-knowledge there may be a sylvan strength and integrity in thatwhich he is. "A few strong instincts and a few plain rules" suffice us.
My will never gave the images in my mind the rank they now take. Theregular course of studies, the years of academical and professionaleducation have not yielded me better facts than some idle books underthe bench at the Latin School. What we do not call education is moreprecious than that which we call so. We form no guess, at the timeof receiving a thought, of its comparative value. And education oftenwastes its effort in attempts to thwart and balk this natural magnetism,which is sure to select what belongs to it.
In like manner our moral nature is vitiated by any interference of ourwill. People represent virtue as a struggle, and take to themselvesgreat airs upon their attainments, and the question is everywhere vexedwhen a noble nature is commended, whether the man is not better whostrives with temptation. But there is no merit in the matter. Either Godis there or he is not there. We love characters in proportion as theyare impulsive and spontaneous. The less a man thinks or knows abouthis virtues the better we like him. Timoleon's victories are the bestvictories, which ran and flowed like Homer's verses, Plutarch said. Whenwe see a soul whose acts are all regal, graceful and pleasant as roses,we must thank God that such things can be and are, and not turn sourlyon the angel and say 'Crump is a better man with his grunting resistanceto all his native devils.'
Not less conspicuous is the preponderance of nature over will in allpractical life. There is less intention in history than we ascribe toit. We impute deep-laid far-sighted plans to Caesar and Napoleon;but the best of their power was in nature, not in them. Men of anextraordinary success, in their honest moments, have always sung, 'Notunto us, not unto us.' According to the faith of their times they havebuilt altars to Fortune, or to Destiny, or to St. Julian. Their successlay in their parallelism to the course of thought, which found in theman unobstructed channel; and the wonders of which they were the visibleconductors seemed to the eye their deed. Did the wires generate thegalvanism? It is even true that there was less in them on which theycould reflect than in another; as the virtue of a pipe is to be smoothand hollow. That which externally seemed will and immovableness waswillingness and self-annihilation. Could Shakspeare give a theory ofShakspeare? Could ever a man of prodigious mathematical genius convey toothers any insight into his methods? If he could communicate thatsecret it would instantly lose its exaggerated value, blending with thedaylight and the vital energy the power to stand and to go.
The lesson is forcibly taught by these observations that our life mightbe much easier and simpler than we make it; that the world might bea happier place than it is; that there is no need of struggles,convulsions, and despairs, of the wringing of the hands and the gnashingof the teeth; that we miscreate our own evils. We interfere with theoptimism of nature; for whenever we get this vantage-ground of the past,or of a wiser mind in the present, we are able to discern that we arebegirt with laws which execute themselves.
The face of external nature teaches the same lesson. Nature will nothave us fret and fume. She does not like our benevolence or our learningmuch better than she likes our frauds and wars. When we come out ofthe caucus, or the bank, or the Abolition-convention, or theTemperance-meeting, or the Transcendental club into the fields andwoods, she says to us, 'So hot? my little Sir.'
We are full of mechanical actions. We must needs intermeddle and havethings in our own way, until the sacrifices and virtues of societyare odious. Love should make joy; but our benevolence is unhappy. OurSunday-schools and churches and pauper-societies are yokes to the neck.We pain ourselves to please nobody. There are natural ways of arrivingat the same ends at which these aim, but do not arrive. Why should allvirtue work in one and the same way? Why should all give dollars? It isvery inconvenient to us country folk, and we do not think any good willcome of it. We have not dollars; merchants have; let them give them.Farmers will give corn; poets will sing; women will sew; laborers willlend a hand; the children will bring flowers. And why drag this deadweight of a Sunday-school over the whole Christendom? It is natural andbeautiful that childhood should inquire and maturity should teach; butit is time enough to answer questions when they are asked. Do not shutup the young people against their will in a pew and force the childrento ask them questions for an hour against their will.
If we look wider, things are all alike; laws and letters and creeds andmodes of living seem a travesty of truth. Our society is encumbered byponderous machinery, which resembles the endless aqueducts whichthe Romans built over hill and dale and which are superseded by thediscovery of the law that water rises to the level of its source. It isa Chinese wall which any nimble Tartar can leap over. It is a standingarmy, not so good as a peace. It is a graduated, titled, richlyappointed empire, quite superfluous when town-meetings are found toanswer just as well.
Let us draw a lesson from nature, which always works by short ways.When the fruit is ripe, it falls. When the fruit is despatched, the leaffalls. The circuit of the waters is mere falling. The walking of manand all animals is a falling forward. All our manual labor and works ofstrength, as prying, splitting, digging, rowing and so forth, are doneby dint of continual falling, and the globe, earth, moon, comet, sun,star, fall for ever and ever.
The simplicity of the universe is very different from the simplicity ofa machine. He who sees moral nature out and out and thoroughly knows howknowledge is acquired and character formed, is a pedant. The simplicityof nature is not that which may easily be read, but is inexhaustible.The last analysis can no wise be made. We judge of a man's wisdom by hishope, knowing that the perception of the inexhaustibleness of nature isan immortal youth. The wild fertility of nature is felt in comparing ourrigid names and reputations with our fluid consciousness. We pass in theworld for sects and schools, for erudition and piety, and we are all thetime jejune babes. One sees very well how Pyrrhonism grew up. Every mansees that he is that middle point whereof every thing may be affirmedand denied with equal reason. He is old, he is young, he is very wise,he is altogether ignorant. He hears and feels what you say of theseraphim, and of the tin-peddler. There is no permanent wise man exceptin the figment of the Stoics. We side with the hero, as we read orpaint, against the coward and the robber; but we have been ourselvesthat coward and robber, and shall be again,--not in the lowcircumstance, but in comparison with the grandeurs possible to the soul.
A little consideration of what takes place around us every day wouldshow us that a higher law than that of our will regulates events; thatour painful labors are unnecessary and fruitless; that only in our easy,simple, spontaneous action are we strong, and by contenting ourselveswith obedience we become divine. Belief and love,--a believing love willrelieve us of a vast load of care. O my brothers, God exists. There isa soul at the centre of nature and over the will of every man, sothat none of us can wrong the universe. It has so infused its strongenchantment into nature that we prosper when we accept its advice,and when we struggle to wound its creatures our hands are glued to oursides, or they beat our own breasts. The whole course of things goes toteach us faith. We need only obey. There is guidance for each of us, andby lowly listening we shall hear the right word. Why need you choose sopainfully your place and occupation and associates and modes of actionand of entertainment? Certainly there is a possible right for you thatprecludes the need of balance and wilful election. For you there is areality, a fit place and congenial duties. Place yourself in the middleof the stream of power and wisdom which animates all whom it floats,and you are without effort impelled to truth, to right and a perfectcontentment. Then you put all gainsayers in the wrong. Then you arethe world, the measure of right, of truth, of beauty. If we will notbe mar-plots with our miserable interferences, the work, the society,letters, arts, science, religion of men would go on far better thannow, and the heaven predicted from the beginning of the world, and stillpredicted from the bottom of the heart, would organize itself, as do nowthe rose and the air and the sun.
I say, do not choose; but that is a figure of speech by which I woulddistinguish what is commonly called choice among men, and which is apartial act, the choice of the hands, of the eyes, of the appetites, andnot a whole act of the man. But that which I call right or goodness,is the choice of my constitution; and that which I call heaven, andinwardly aspire after, is the state or circumstance desirable to myconstitution; and the action which I in all my years tend to do, is thework for my faculties. We must hold a man amenable to reason for thechoice of his daily craft or profession. It is not an excuse any longerfor his deeds that they are the custom of his trade. What business hashe with an evil trade? Has he not a calling in his character?
Each man has his own vocation. The talent is the call. There is onedirection in which all space is open to him. He has faculties silentlyinviting him thither to endless exertion. He is like a ship in a river;he runs against obstructions on every side but one, on that side allobstruction is taken away and he sweeps serenely over a deepeningchannel into an infinite sea. This talent and this call depend on hisorganization, or the mode in which the general soul incarnates itself inhim. He inclines to do something which is easy to him and good when itis done, but which no other man can do. He has no rival. For the moretruly he consults his own powers, the more difference will his workexhibit from the work of any other. His ambition is exactly proportionedto his powers. The height of the pinnacle is determined by the breadthof the base. Every man has this call of the power to do somewhat unique,and no man has any other call. The pretence that he has another call, asummons by name and personal election and outward "signs that mark himextraordinary, and not in the roll of common men," is fanaticism,and betrays obtuseness to perceive that there is one mind in all theindividuals, and no respect of persons therein.
By doing his work he makes the need felt which he can supply, andcreates the taste by which he is enjoyed. By doing his own work heunfolds himself. It is the vice of our public speaking that it has notabandonment. Somewhere, not only every orator but every man should letout all the length of all the reins; should find or make a frank andhearty expression of what force and meaning is in him. The commonexperience is that the man fits himself as well as he can to thecustomary details of that work or trade he falls into, and tends it as adog turns a spit. Then is he a part of the machine he moves; the man islost. Until he can manage to communicate himself to others in his fullstature and proportion, he does not yet find his vocation. He must findin that an outlet for his character, so that he may justify his work totheir eyes. If the labor is mean, let him by his thinking and charactermake it liberal. Whatever he knows and thinks, whatever in hisapprehension is worth doing, that let him communicate, or men will neverknow and honor him aright. Foolish, whenever you take the meannessand formality of that thing you do, instead of converting it into theobedient spiracle of your character and aims.
We like only such actions as have already long had the praise of men,and do not perceive that any thing man can do may be divinely done.We think greatness entailed or organized in some places or duties, incertain offices or occasions, and do not see that Paganini canextract rapture from a catgut, and Eulenstein from a jews-harp, anda nimble-fingered lad out of shreds of paper with his scissors, andLandseer out of swine, and the hero out of the pitiful habitation andcompany in which he was hidden. What we call obscure condition or vulgarsociety is that condition and society whose poetry is not yet written,but which you shall presently make as enviable and renowned as any. Inour estimates let us take a lesson from kings. The parts of hospitality,the connection of families, the impressiveness of death, and a thousandother things, royalty makes its own estimate of, and a royal mind will.To make habitually a new estimate,--that is elevation.
What a man does, that he has. What has he to do with hope or fear? Inhimself is his might. Let him regard no good as solid but that which isin his nature and which must grow out of him as long as he exists. Thegoods of fortune may come and go like summer leaves; let himscatter them on every wind as the momentary signs of his infiniteproductiveness.
He may have his own. A man's genius, the quality that differences himfrom every other, the susceptibility to one class of influences, theselection of what is fit for him, the rejection of what is unfit,determines for him the character of the universe. A man is a method, aprogressive arrangement; a selecting principle, gathering his like tohim wherever he goes. He takes only his own out of the multiplicity thatsweeps and circles round him. He is like one of those booms whichare set out from the shore on rivers to catch drift-wood, or like theloadstone amongst splinters of steel. Those facts, words, persons, whichdwell in his memory without his being able to say why, remainbecause they have a relation to him not less real for being as yetunapprehended. They are symbols of value to him as they can interpretparts of his consciousness which he would vainly seek words for in theconventional images of books and other minds. What attracts my attentionshall have it, as I will go to the man who knocks at my door, whilsta thousand persons as worthy go by it, to whom I give no regard. It isenough that these particulars speak to me. A few anecdotes, a few traitsof character, manners, face, a few incidents, have an emphasis in yourmemory out of all proportion to their apparent significance if youmeasure them by the ordinary standards. They relate to your gift.Let them have their weight, and do not reject them and cast about forillustration and facts more usual in literature. What your heart thinksgreat is great. The soul's emphasis is always right.
Over all things that are agreeable to his nature and genius the man hasthe highest right. Everywhere he may take what belongs to his spiritualestate, nor can he take any thing else though all doors were open, norcan all the force of men hinder him from taking so much. It is vain toattempt to keep a secret from one who has a right to know it. It willtell itself. That mood into which a friend can bring us is his dominionover us. To the thoughts of that state of mind he has a right. Allthe secrets of that state of mind he can compel. This is a law whichstatesmen use in practice. All the terrors of the French Republic, whichheld Austria in awe, were unable to command her diplomacy. But Napoleonsent to Vienna M. de Narbonne, one of the old noblesse, with the morals,manners and name of that interest, saying that it was indispensable tosend to the old aristocracy of Europe men of the same connection, which,in fact, constitutes a sort of free-masonry. M. de Narbonne in less thana fortnight penetrated all the secrets of the imperial cabinet.
Nothing seems so easy as to speak and to be understood. Yet a man maycome to find that the strongest of defences and of ties,--that he hasbeen understood; and he who has received an opinion may come to find itthe most inconvenient of bonds.
If a teacher have any opinion which he wishes to conceal, his pupilswill become as fully indoctrinated into that as into any which hepublishes. If you pour water into a vessel twisted into coils andangles, it is vain to say, I will pour it only into this or that;--itwill find its level in all. Men feel and act the consequences of yourdoctrine without being able to show how they follow. Show us an arc ofthe curve, and a good mathematician will find out the whole figure.We are always reasoning from the seen to the unseen. Hence the perfectintelligence that subsists between wise men of remote ages. A man cannotbury his meanings so deep in his book but time and like-minded menwill find them. Plato had a secret doctrine, had he? What secret canhe conceal from the eyes of Bacon? of Montaigne? of Kant? Therefore,Aristotle said of his works, "They are published and not published."
No man can learn what he has not preparation for learning, however nearto his eyes is the object. A chemist may tell his most precious secretsto a carpenter, and he shall be never the wiser,--the secrets he wouldnot utter to a chemist for an estate. God screens us evermore frompremature ideas. Our eyes are holden that we cannot see things thatstare us in the face, until the hour arrives when the mind is ripened;then we behold them, and the time when we saw them not is like a dream.
Not in nature but in man is all the beauty and worth he sees. The worldis very empty, and is indebted to this gilding, exalting soul for allits pride. "Earth fills her lap with splendors" not her own. The vale ofTempe, Tivoli and Rome are earth and water, rocks and sky. There are asgood earth and water in a thousand places, yet how unaffecting!
People are not the better for the sun and moon, the horizon and thetrees; as it is not observed that the keepers of Roman galleries or thevalets of painters have any elevation of thought, or that librarians arewiser men than others. There are graces in the demeanor of a polishedand noble person which are lost upon the eye of a churl. These are likethe stars whose light has not yet reached us.
He may see what he maketh. Our dreams are the sequel of our wakingknowledge. The visions of the night bear some proportion to the visionsof the day. Hideous dreams are exaggerations of the sins of the day. Wesee our evil affections embodied in bad physiognomies. On the Alps thetraveller sometimes beholds his own shadow magnified to a giant, so thatevery gesture of his hand is terrific. "My children," said an old manto his boys scared by a figure in the dark entry, "my children, youwill never see any thing worse than yourselves." As in dreams, so inthe scarcely less fluid events of the world every man sees himself incolossal, without knowing that it is himself. The good, compared to theevil which he sees, is as his own good to his own evil. Every quality ofhis mind is magnified in some one acquaintance, and every emotion ofhis heart in some one. He is like a quincunx of trees, which countsfive,--east, west, north, or south; or an initial, medial, and terminalacrostic. And why not? He cleaves to one person and avoids another,according to their likeness or unlikeness to himself, truly seekinghimself in his associates and moreover in his trade and habits andgestures and meats and drinks, and comes at last to be faithfullyrepresented by every view you take of his circumstances.
He may read what he writes. What can we see or acquire but what we are?You have observed a skilful man reading Virgil. Well, that author is athousand books to a thousand persons. Take the book into your twohands and read your eyes out, you will never find what I find. If anyingenious reader would have a monopoly of the wisdom or delight he gets,he is as secure now the book is Englished, as if it were imprisoned inthe Pelews' tongue. It is with a good book as it is with good company.Introduce a base person among gentlemen, it is all to no purpose; heis not their fellow. Every society protects itself. The company isperfectly safe, and he is not one of them, though his body is in theroom.
What avails it to fight with the eternal laws of mind, which adjust therelation of all persons to each other by the mathematical measure oftheir havings and beings? Gertrude is enamored of Guy; how high, howaristocratic, how Roman his mien and manners! to live with him were lifeindeed, and no purchase is too great; and heaven and earth are movedto that end. Well, Gertrude has Guy; but what now avails how high, howaristocratic, how Roman his mien and manners, if his heart and aims arein the senate, in the theatre and in the billiard-room, and she has noaims, no conversation that can enchant her graceful lord?
He shall have his own society. We can love nothing but nature. The mostwonderful talents, the most meritorious exertions really avail verylittle with us; but nearness or likeness of nature,--how beautiful isthe ease of its victory! Persons approach us, famous for their beauty,for their accomplishments, worthy of all wonder for their charmsand gifts; they dedicate their whole skill to the hour and thecompany,--with very imperfect result. To be sure it would be ungratefulin us not to praise them loudly. Then, when all is done, a person ofrelated mind, a brother or sister by nature, comes to us so softly andeasily, so nearly and intimately, as if it were the blood in our properveins, that we feel as if some one was gone, instead of another havingcome; we are utterly relieved and refreshed; it is a sort of joyfulsolitude. We foolishly think in our days of sin that we must courtfriends by compliance to the customs of society, to its dress, itsbreeding, and its estimates. But only that soul can be my friend whichI encounter on the line of my own march, that soul to which I do notdecline and which does not decline to me, but, native of the samecelestial latitude, repeats in its own all my experience. The scholarforgets himself and apes the customs and costumes of the man of theworld to deserve the smile of beauty, and follows some giddy girl, notyet taught by religious passion to know the noble woman with all that isserene, oracular and beautiful in her soul. Let him be great, and loveshall follow him. Nothing is more deeply punished than the neglect ofthe affinities by which alone society should be formed, and the insanelevity of choosing associates by others' eyes.
He may set his own rate. It is a maxim worthy of all acceptation that aman may have that allowance he takes. Take the place and attitude whichbelong to you, and all men acquiesce. The world must be just. Itleaves every man, with profound unconcern, to set his own rate. Hero ordriveller, it meddles not in the matter. It will certainly accept yourown measure of your doing and being, whether you sneak about and denyyour own name, or whether you see your work produced to the concavesphere of the heavens, one with the revolution of the stars.
The same reality pervades all teaching. The man may teach by doing, andnot otherwise. If he can communicate himself he can teach, but not bywords. He teaches who gives, and he learns who receives. There is noteaching until the pupil is brought into the same state or principle inwhich you are; a transfusion takes place; he is you and you are he; thenis a teaching, and by no unfriendly chance or bad company can he everquite lose the benefit. But your propositions run out of one ear as theyran in at the other. We see it advertised that Mr. Grand will deliveran oration on the Fourth of July, and Mr. Hand before the Mechanics'Association, and we do not go thither, because we know that thesegentlemen will not communicate their own character and experience tothe company. If we had reason to expect such a confidence we should gothrough all inconvenience and opposition. The sick would be carriedin litters. But a public oration is an escapade, a non-committal, anapology, a gag, and not a communication, not a speech, not a man.
A like Nemesis presides over all intellectual works. We have yet tolearn that the thing uttered in words is not therefore affirmed. It mustaffirm itself, or no forms of logic or of oath can give it evidence. Thesentence must also contain its own apology for being spoken.
The effect of any writing on the public mind is mathematicallymeasurable by its depth of thought. How much water does it draw? If itawaken you to think, if it lift you from your feet with the great voiceof eloquence, then the effect is to be wide, slow, permanent, over theminds of men; if the pages instruct you not, they will die like flies inthe hour. The way to speak and write what shall not go out of fashion isto speak and write sincerely. The argument which has not power to reachmy own practice, I may well doubt will fail to reach yours. But takeSidney's maxim:--"Look in thy heart, and write." He that writes tohimself writes to an eternal public. That statement only is fit to bemade public which you have come at in attempting to satisfy your owncuriosity. The writer who takes his subject from his ear and not fromhis heart, should know that he has lost as much as he seems to havegained, and when the empty book has gathered all its praise, and halfthe people say, 'What poetry! what genius!' it still needs fuel to makefire. That only profits which is profitable. Life alone can impart life;and though we should burst we can only be valued as we make ourselvesvaluable. There is no luck in literary reputation. They who make up thefinal verdict upon every book are not the partial and noisy readers ofthe hour when it appears, but a court as of angels, a public not to bebribed, not to be entreated and not to be overawed, decides upon everyman's title to fame. Only those books come down which deserve to last.Gilt edges, vellum and morocco, and presentation-copies to all thelibraries will not preserve a book in circulation beyond its intrinsicdate. It must go with all Walpole's Noble and Royal Authors to its fate.Blackmore, Kotzebue, or Pollok may endure for a night, but Moses andHomer stand for ever. There are not in the world at any one time morethan a dozen persons who read and understand Plato,--never enough topay for an edition of his works; yet to every generation these come dulydown, for the sake of those few persons, as if God brought them inhis hand. "No book," said Bentley, "was ever written down by any butitself." The permanence of all books is fixed by no effort, friendly orhostile, but by their own specific gravity, or the intrinsic importanceof their contents to the constant mind of man. "Do not trouble yourselftoo much about the light on your statue," said Michael Angelo to theyoung sculptor; "the light of the public square will test its value."
In like manner the effect of every action is measured by the depth ofthe sentiment from which it proceeds. The great man knew not that he wasgreat. It took a century or two for that fact to appear. What he did,he did because he must; it was the most natural thing in the world, andgrew out of the circumstances of the moment. But now, every thing hedid, even to the lifting of his finger or the eating of bread, lookslarge, all-related, and is called an institution.
These are the demonstrations in a few particulars of the genius ofnature; they show the direction of the stream. But the stream is blood;every drop is alive. Truth has not single victories; all things areits organs,--not only dust and stones, but errors and lies. The lawsof disease, physicians say, are as beautiful as the laws of health. Ourphilosophy is affirmative and readily accepts the testimony of negativefacts, as every shadow points to the sun. By a divine necessity everyfact in nature is constrained to offer its testimony.
Human character evermore publishes itself. The most fugitive deed andword, the mere air of doing a thing, the intimated purpose, expressescharacter. If you act you show character; if you sit still, if yousleep, you show it. You think because you have spoken nothing whenothers spoke, and have given no opinion on the times, on the church, onslavery, on marriage, on socialism, on secret societies, on the college,on parties and persons, that your verdict is still expected withcuriosity as a reserved wisdom. Far otherwise; your silence answers veryloud. You have no oracle to utter, and your fellow-men have learnedthat you cannot help them; for oracles speak. Doth not Wisdom cry andUnderstanding put forth her voice?
Dreadful limits are set in nature to the powers of dissimulation. Truthtyrannizes over the unwilling members of the body. Faces never lie,it is said. No man need be deceived who will study the changes ofexpression. When a man speaks the truth in the spirit of truth, his eyeis as clear as the heavens. When he has base ends and speaks falsely,the eye is muddy and sometimes asquint.
I have heard an experienced counsellor say that he never feared theeffect upon a jury of a lawyer who does not believe in his heart thathis client ought to have a verdict. If he does not believe it hisunbelief will appear to the jury, despite all his protestations, andwill become their unbelief. This is that law whereby a work of art, ofwhatever kind, sets us in the same state of mind wherein the artist waswhen he made it. That which we do not believe we cannot adequately say,though we may repeat the words never so often. It was this convictionwhich Swedenborg expressed when he described a group of persons in thespiritual world endeavoring in vain to articulate a proposition whichthey did not believe; but they could not, though they twisted and foldedtheir lips even to indignation.
A man passes for that he is worth. Very idle is all curiosity concerningother people's estimate of us, and all fear of remaining unknown isnot less so. If a man know that he can do any thing,--that he can do itbetter than any one else,--he has a pledge of the acknowledgment of thatfact by all persons. The world is full of judgment-days, and into everyassembly that a man enters, in every action he attempts, he is gaugedand stamped. In every troop of boys that whoop and run in each yard andsquare, a new-comer is as well and accurately weighed in the course ofa few days and stamped with his right number, as if he had undergone aformal trial of his strength, speed and temper. A stranger comes froma distant school, with better dress, with trinkets in his pockets, withairs and pretensions; an older boy says to himself, 'It's of no use;we shall find him out to-morrow.' 'What has he done?' is the divinequestion which searches men and transpierces every false reputation. Afop may sit in any chair of the world nor be distinguished for his hourfrom Homer and Washington; but there need never be any doubt concerningthe respective ability of human beings. Pretension may sit still,but cannot act. Pretension never feigned an act of real greatness.Pretension never wrote an Iliad, nor drove back Xerxes, norchristianized the world, nor abolished slavery.
As much virtue as there is, so much appears; as much goodness as thereis, so much reverence it commands. All the devils respect virtue. Thehigh, the generous, the self-devoted sect will always instruct andcommand mankind. Never was a sincere word utterly lost. Never amagnanimity fell to the ground, but there is some heart to greet andaccept it unexpectedly. A man passes for that he is worth. What he isengraves itself on his face, on his form, on his fortunes, in lettersof light. Concealment avails him nothing, boasting nothing. There isconfession in the glances of our eyes, in our smiles, in salutations,and the grasp of hands. His sin bedaubs him, mars all his goodimpression. Men know not why they do not trust him, but they do nottrust him. His vice glasses his eye, cuts lines of mean expression inhis cheek, pinches the nose, sets the mark of the beast on the back ofthe head, and writes O fool! fool! on the forehead of a king.
If you would not be known to do any thing, never do it. A man may playthe fool in the drifts of a desert, but every grain of sand shall seemto see. He may be a solitary eater, but he cannot keep his foolishcounsel. A broken complexion, a swinish look, ungenerous acts and thewant of due knowledge,--all blab. Can a cook, a Chiffinch, an Iachimobe mistaken for Zeno or Paul? Confucius exclaimed,--"How can a man beconcealed? How can a man be concealed?"
On the other hand, the hero fears not that if he withhold the avowalof a just and brave act it will go unwitnessed and unloved. One knowsit,--himself,--and is pledged by it to sweetness of peace and tonobleness of aim which will prove in the end a better proclamation of itthan the relating of the incident. Virtue is the adherence in action tothe nature of things, and the nature of things makes it prevalent. Itconsists in a perpetual substitution of being for seeming, and withsublime propriety God is described as saying, I AM.
The lesson which these observations convey is, Be, and not seem. Let usacquiesce. Let us take our bloated nothingness out of the path of thedivine circuits. Let us unlearn our wisdom of the world. Let us lie lowin the Lord's power and learn that truth alone makes rich and great.
If you visit your friend, why need you apologize for not having visitedhim, and waste his time and deface your own act? Visit him now. Lethim feel that the highest love has come to see him, in thee itslowest organ. Or why need you torment yourself and friend by secretself-reproaches that you have not assisted him or complimented him withgifts and salutations heretofore? Be a gift and a benediction. Shinewith real light and not with the borrowed reflection of gifts. Commonmen are apologies for men; they bow the head, excuse themselves withprolix reasons, and accumulate appearances because the substance is not.
We are full of these superstitions of sense, the worship of magnitude.We call the poet inactive, because he is not a president, a merchant, ora porter. We adore an institution, and do not see that it is foundedon a thought which we have. But real action is in silent moments. Theepochs of our life are not in the visible facts of our choice of acalling, our marriage, our acquisition of an office, and the like,but in a silent thought by the way-side as we walk; in a thought whichrevises our entire manner of life and says,--'Thus hast thou done, butit were better thus.' And all our after years, like menials, serve andwait on this, and according to their ability execute its will. Thisrevisal or correction is a constant force, which, as a tendency, reachesthrough our lifetime. The object of the man, the aim of these moments,is to make daylight shine through him, to suffer the law to traversehis whole being without obstruction, so that on what point soever of hisdoing your eye falls it shall report truly of his character, whether itbe his diet, his house, his religious forms, his society, his mirth, hisvote, his opposition. Now he is not homogeneous, but heterogeneous, andthe ray does not traverse; there are no thorough lights, but the eye ofthe beholder is puzzled, detecting many unlike tendencies and a life notyet at one.
Why should we make it a point with our false modesty to disparagethat man we are and that form of being assigned to us? A good manis contented. I love and honor Epaminondas, but I do not wish to beEpaminondas. I hold it more just to love the world of this hour thanthe world of his hour. Nor can you, if I am true, excite me to the leastuneasiness by saying, 'He acted and thou sittest still.' I see actionto be good, when the need is, and sitting still to be also good.Epaminondas, if he was the man I take him for, would have sat still withjoy and peace, if his lot had been mine. Heaven is large, and affordsspace for all modes of love and fortitude. Why should we be busybodiesand superserviceable? Action and inaction are alike to the true. Onepiece of the tree is cut for a weathercock and one for the sleeper of abridge; the virtue of the wood is apparent in both.
I desire not to disgrace the soul. The fact that I am here certainlyshows me that the soul had need of an organ here. Shall I not assume thepost? Shall I skulk and dodge and duck with my unseasonable apologiesand vain modesty and imagine my being here impertinent? less pertinentthan Epaminondas or Homer being there? and that the soul did not knowits own needs? Besides, without any reasoning on the matter, I haveno discontent. The good soul nourishes me and unlocks new magazinesof power and enjoyment to me every day. I will not meanly decline theimmensity of good, because I have heard that it has come to others inanother shape.
Besides, why should we be cowed by the name of Action? 'Tis a trick ofthe senses,--no more. We know that the ancestor of every action is athought. The poor mind does not seem to itself to be any thing unless ithave an outside badge,--some Gentoo diet, or Quaker coat, or Calvinisticprayer-meeting, or philanthropic society, or a great donation, or a highoffice, or, any how, some wild contrasting action to testify that it issomewhat. The rich mind lies in the sun and sleeps, and is Nature. Tothink is to act.
Let us, if we must have great actions, make our own so. All action is ofan infinite elasticity, and the least admits of being inflated with thecelestial air until it eclipses the sun and moon. Let us seek one peaceby fidelity. Let me heed my duties. Why need I go gadding into thescenes and philosophy of Greek and Italian history before I havejustified myself to my benefactors? How dare I read Washington'scampaigns when I have not answered the letters of my own correspondents?Is not that a just objection to much of our reading? It is apusillanimous desertion of our work to gaze after our neighbors. It ispeeping. Byron says of Jack Bunting,--
     "He knew not what to say, and so he swore."
I may say it of our preposterous use of books,--He knew not what to do,and so he read. I can think of nothing to fill my time with, and I findthe Life of Brant. It is a very extravagant compliment to pay to Brant,or to General Schuyler, or to General Washington. My time should be asgood as their time,--my facts, my net of relations, as good as theirs,or either of theirs. Rather let me do my work so well that other idlersif they choose may compare my texture with the texture of these and findit identical with the best.
This over-estimate of the possibilities of Paul and Pericles, thisunder-estimate of our own, comes from a neglect of the fact of anidentical nature. Bonaparte knew but one merit, and rewarded in one andthe same way the good soldier, the good astronomer, the good poet,the good player. The poet uses the names of Caesar, of Tamerlane, ofBonduca, of Belisarius; the painter uses the conventional story ofthe Virgin Mary, of Paul, of Peter. He does not therefore defer to thenature of these accidental men, of these stock heroes. If the poet writea true drama, then he is Caesar, and not the player of Caesar; then theselfsame strain of thought, emotion as pure, wit as subtle, motionsas swift, mounting, extravagant, and a heart as great, self-sufficing,dauntless, which on the waves of its love and hope can uplift all thatis reckoned solid and precious in the world,--palaces, gardens, money,navies, kingdoms,--marking its own incomparable worth by the slight itcasts on these gauds of men;--these all are his, and by the power ofthese he rouses the nations. Let a man believe in God, and not in namesand places and persons. Let the great soul incarnated in some woman'sform, poor and sad and single, in some Dolly or Joan, go out to service,and sweep chambers and scour floors, and its effulgent daybeams cannotbe muffled or hid, but to sweep and scour will instantly appear supremeand beautiful actions, the top and radiance of human life, and allpeople will get mops and brooms; until, lo! suddenly the great soul hasenshrined itself in some other form and done some other deed, and thatis now the flower and head of all living nature.
We are the photometers, we the irritable goldleaf and tinfoil thatmeasure the accumulations of the subtle element. We know the authenticeffects of the true fire through every one of its million disguises.
*****


     LOVE.
     "I was as a gem concealed;     Me my burning ray revealed."                            Koran.



V. LOVE.
Every promise of the soul has innumerable fulfilments; each of its joysripens into a new want. Nature, uncontainable, flowing, forelooking, inthe first sentiment of kindness anticipates already a benevolence whichshall lose all particular regards in its general light. The introductionto this felicity is in a private and tender relation of one to one,which is the enchantment of human life; which, like a certain divinerage and enthusiasm, seizes on man at one period and works a revolutionin his mind and body; unites him to his race, pledges him to thedomestic and civic relations, carries him with new sympathy into nature,enhances the power of the senses, opens the imagination, adds to hischaracter heroic and sacred attributes, establishes marriage, and givespermanence to human society.
The natural association of the sentiment of love with the heyday of theblood seems to require that in order to portray it in vivid tints,which every youth and maid should confess to be true to their throbbingexperience, one must not be too old. The delicious fancies of youthreject the least savor of a mature philosophy, as chilling with age andpedantry their purple bloom. And therefore I know I incur the imputationof unnecessary hardness and stoicism from those who compose the Courtand Parliament of Love. But from these formidable censors I shall appealto my seniors. For it is to be considered that this passion of whichwe speak, though it begin with the young, yet forsakes not the old, orrather suffers no one who is truly its servant to grow old, but makesthe aged participators of it not less than the tender maiden, though ina different and nobler sort. For it is a fire that kindling its firstembers in the narrow nook of a private bosom, caught from a wanderingspark out of another private heart, glows and enlarges until it warmsand beams upon multitudes of men and women, upon the universal heart ofall, and so lights up the whole world and all nature with its generousflames. It matters not therefore whether we attempt to describe thepassion at twenty, at thirty, or at eighty years. He who paints it atthe first period will lose some of its later, he who paints it atthe last, some of its earlier traits. Only it is to be hoped that bypatience and the Muses' aid we may attain to that inward view of the lawwhich shall describe a truth ever young and beautiful, so central thatit shall commend itself to the eye, at whatever angle beholden.
And the first condition is, that we must leave a too close and lingeringadherence to facts, and study the sentiment as it appeared in hope andnot in history. For each man sees his own life defaced and disfigured,as the life of man is not, to his imagination. Each man sees over hisown experience a certain stain of error, whilst that of other men looksfair and ideal. Let any man go back to those delicious relations whichmake the beauty of his life, which have given him sincerest instructionand nourishment, he will shrink and moan. Alas! I know not why, butinfinite compunctions embitter in mature life the remembrances ofbudding joy and cover every beloved name. Every thing is beautiful seenfrom the point of the intellect, or as truth. But all is sour, if seenas experience. Details are melancholy; the plan is seemly and noble. Inthe actual world--the painful kingdom of time and place--dwell care, andcanker, and fear. With thought, with the ideal, is immortal hilarity,the rose of joy. Round it all the Muses sing. But grief cleaves tonames, and persons, and the partial interests of to-day and yesterday.
The strong bent of nature is seen in the proportion which this topicof personal relations usurps in the conversation of society. What dowe wish to know of any worthy person so much, as how he has sped inthe history of this sentiment? What books in the circulating librariescirculate? How we glow over these novels of passion, when the story istold with any spark of truth and nature! And what fastens attention, inthe intercourse of life, like any passage betraying affection betweentwo parties? Perhaps we never saw them before, and never shall meet themagain. But we see them exchange a glance, or betray a deep emotion, andwe are no longer strangers. We understand them, and take the warmestinterest in the development of the romance. All mankind love a lover.The earliest demonstrations of complacency and kindness are nature'smost winning pictures. It is the dawn of civility and grace in thecoarse and rustic. The rude village boy teases the girls about theschool-house door;--but to-day he comes running into the entry, andmeets one fair child disposing her satchel; he holds her books to helpher, and instantly it seems to him as if she removed herself from himinfinitely, and was a sacred precinct. Among the throng of girls heruns rudely enough, but one alone distances him; and these two littleneighbors, that were so close just now, have learned to respect eachother's personality. Or who can avert his eyes from the engaging,half-artful, half-artless ways of school-girls who go into the countryshops to buy a skein of silk or a sheet of paper, and talk half anhour about nothing with the broad-faced, good-natured shop-boy. In thevillage they are on a perfect equality, which love delights in, andwithout any coquetry the happy, affectionate nature of woman flows outin this pretty gossip. The girls may have little beauty, yet plainlydo they establish between them and the good boy the most agreeable,confiding relations, what with their fun and their earnest, about Edgarand Jonas and Almira, and who was invited to the party, and who dancedat the dancing-school, and when the singing-school would begin, andother nothings concerning which the parties cooed. By and by that boywants a wife, and very truly and heartily will he know where to finda sincere and sweet mate, without any risk such as Milton deplores asincident to scholars and great men.
I have been told that in some public discourses of mine my reverence forthe intellect has made me unjustly cold to the personal relations. Butnow I almost shrink at the remembrance of such disparaging words. Forpersons are love's world, and the coldest philosopher cannot recount thedebt of the young soul wandering here in nature to the power oflove, without being tempted to unsay, as treasonable to nature, aughtderogatory to the social instincts. For though the celestial rapturefalling out of heaven seizes only upon those of tender age, and althougha beauty overpowering all analysis or comparison and putting usquite beside ourselves we can seldom see after thirty years, yet theremembrance of these visions outlasts all other remembrances, and is awreath of flowers on the oldest brows. But here is a strange fact; itmay seem to many men, in revising their experience, that they haveno fairer page in their life's book than the delicious memory of somepassages wherein affection contrived to give a witchcraft, surpassingthe deep attraction of its own truth, to a parcel of accidental andtrivial circumstances. In looking backward they may find that severalthings which were not the charm have more reality to this groping memorythan the charm itself which embalmed them. But be our experience inparticulars what it may, no man ever forgot the visitations of thatpower to his heart and brain, which created all things anew; which wasthe dawn in him of music, poetry, and art; which made the face ofnature radiant with purple light, the morning and the night variedenchantments; when a single tone of one voice could make the heartbound, and the most trivial circumstance associated with one form is putin the amber of memory; when he became all eye when one was present,and all memory when one was gone; when the youth becomes a watcher ofwindows and studious of a glove, a veil, a ribbon, or the wheels of acarriage; when no place is too solitary and none too silent, for him whohas richer company and sweeter conversation in his new thoughts than anyold friends, though best and purest, can give him; for the figures,the motions, the words of the beloved object are not like other imageswritten in water, but, as Plutarch said, "enamelled in fire," and makethe study of midnight:--
     "Thou art not gone being gone, where'er thou art,      Thou leav'st in him thy watchful eyes, in him thy        loving heart."
In the noon and the afternoon of life we still throb at the recollectionof days when happiness was not happy enough, but must be drugged withthe relish of pain and fear; for he touched the secret of the matter whosaid of love,--
     "All other pleasures are not worth its pains:"
and when the day was not long enough, but the night too must be consumedin keen recollections; when the head boiled all night on the pillowwith the generous deed it resolved on; when the moonlight was a pleasingfever and the stars were letters and the flowers ciphers and the air wascoined into song; when all business seemed an impertinence, and all themen and women running to and fro in the streets, mere pictures.
The passion rebuilds the world for the youth. It makes all things aliveand significant. Nature grows conscious. Every bird on the boughs of thetree sings now to his heart and soul. The notes are almost articulate.The clouds have faces as he looks on them. The trees of the forest,the waving grass and the peeping flowers have grown intelligent; and healmost fears to trust them with the secret which they seem to invite.Yet nature soothes and sympathizes. In the green solitude he finds adearer home than with men:--
          "Fountain-heads and pathless groves,           Places which pale passion loves,           Moonlight walks, when all the fowls           Are safely housed, save bats and owls,           A midnight bell, a passing groan,--           These are the sounds we feed upon."
Behold there in the wood the fine madman! He is a palace of sweet soundsand sights; he dilates; he is twice a man; he walks with arms akimbo; hesoliloquizes; he accosts the grass and the trees; he feels the blood ofthe violet, the clover and the lily in his veins; and he talks with thebrook that wets his foot.
The heats that have opened his perceptions of natural beauty have madehim love music and verse. It is a fact often observed, that men havewritten good verses under the inspiration of passion, who cannot writewell under any other circumstances.
The like force has the passion over all his nature. It expands thesentiment; it makes the clown gentle and gives the coward heart. Intothe most pitiful and abject it will infuse a heart and courage to defythe world, so only it have the countenance of the beloved object. Ingiving him to another it still more gives him to himself. He is a newman, with new perceptions, new and keener purposes, and a religioussolemnity of character and aims. He does not longer appertain to hisfamily and society; he is somewhat; he is a person; he is a soul.
And here let us examine a little nearer the nature of that influencewhich is thus potent over the human youth. Beauty, whose revelation toman we now celebrate, welcome as the sun wherever it pleases to shine,which pleases everybody with it and with themselves, seems sufficientto itself. The lover cannot paint his maiden to his fancy poor andsolitary. Like a tree in flower, so much soft, budding, informingloveliness is society for itself; and she teaches his eye why Beauty waspictured with Loves and Graces attending her steps. Her existence makesthe world rich. Though she extrudes all other persons from his attentionas cheap and unworthy, she indemnifies him by carrying out her own beinginto somewhat impersonal, large, mundane, so that the maiden standsto him for a representative of all select things and virtues. For thatreason the lover never sees personal resemblances in his mistress to herkindred or to others. His friends find in her a likeness to her mother,or her sisters, or to persons not of her blood. The lover sees noresemblance except to summer evenings and diamond mornings, to rainbowsand the song of birds.
The ancients called beauty the flowering of virtue. Who can analyze thenameless charm which glances from one and another face and form? We aretouched with emotions of tenderness and complacency, but we cannotfind whereat this dainty emotion, this wandering gleam, points. Itis destroyed for the imagination by any attempt to refer it toorganization. Nor does it point to any relations of friendship or loveknown and described in society, but, as it seems to me, to a quiteother and unattainable sphere, to relations of transcendent delicacyand sweetness, to what roses and violets hint and foreshow. We cannotapproach beauty. Its nature is like opaline doves'-neck lustres,hovering and evanescent. Herein it resembles the most excellentthings, which all have this rainbow character, defying all attempts atappropriation and use. What else did Jean Paul Richter signify, when hesaid to music, "Away! away! thou speakest to me of things which in allmy endless life I have not found, and shall not find." The same fluencymay be observed in every work of the plastic arts. The statue is thenbeautiful when it begins to be incomprehensible, when it is passing outof criticism and can no longer be defined by compass and measuring-wand,but demands an active imagination to go with it and to say what it is inthe act of doing. The god or hero of the sculptor is always representedin a transition from that which is representable to the senses, to thatwhich is not. Then first it ceases to be a stone. The same remark holdsof painting. And of poetry the success is not attained when it lulls andsatisfies, but when it astonishes and fires us with new endeavors afterthe unattainable. Concerning it Landor inquires "whether it is not to bereferred to some purer state of sensation and existence."
In like manner, personal beauty is then first charming and itself whenit dissatisfies us with any end; when it becomes a story without an end;when it suggests gleams and visions and not earthly satisfactions; whenit makes the beholder feel his unworthiness; when he cannot feel hisright to it, though he were Caesar; he cannot feel more right to it thanto the firmament and the splendors of a sunset.
Hence arose the saying, "If I love you, what is that to you?" We say sobecause we feel that what we love is not in your will, but above it. Itis not you, but your radiance. It is that which you know not in yourselfand can never know.
This agrees well with that high philosophy of Beauty which the ancientwriters delighted in; for they said that the soul of man, embodied hereon earth, went roaming up and down in quest of that other world of itsown out of which it came into this, but was soon stupefied by the lightof the natural sun, and unable to see any other objects than those ofthis world, which are but shadows of real things. Therefore the Deitysends the glory of youth before the soul, that it may avail itself ofbeautiful bodies as aids to its recollection of the celestial good andfair; and the man beholding such a person in the female sex runs toher and finds the highest joy in contemplating the form, movement, andintelligence of this person, because it suggests to him the presence ofthat which indeed is within the beauty, and the cause of the beauty.
If however, from too much conversing with material objects, the soul wasgross, and misplaced its satisfaction in the body, it reaped nothing butsorrow; body being unable to fulfil the promise which beauty holds out;but if, accepting the hint of these visions and suggestions which beautymakes to his mind, the soul passes through the body and falls to admirestrokes of character, and the lovers contemplate one another in theirdiscourses and their actions, then they pass to the true palace ofbeauty, more and more inflame their love of it, and by this loveextinguishing the base affection, as the sun puts out the fire byshining on the hearth, they become pure and hallowed. By conversationwith that which is in itself excellent, magnanimous, lowly, and just,the lover comes to a warmer love of these nobilities, and a quickerapprehension of them. Then he passes from loving them in one to lovingthem in all, and so is the one beautiful soul only the door throughwhich he enters to the society of all true and pure souls. In theparticular society of his mate he attains a clearer sight of any spot,any taint which her beauty has contracted from this world, and isable to point it out, and this with mutual joy that they are now able,without offence, to indicate blemishes and hindrances in each other, andgive to each all help and comfort in curing the same. And beholding inmany souls the traits of the divine beauty, and separating in eachsoul that which is divine from the taint which it has contracted inthe world, the lover ascends to the highest beauty, to the love andknowledge of the Divinity, by steps on this ladder of created souls.
Somewhat like this have the truly wise told us of love in all ages.The doctrine is not old, nor is it new. If Plato, Plutarch and Apuleiustaught it, so have Petrarch, Angelo and Milton. It awaits a truerunfolding in opposition and rebuke to that subterranean prudence whichpresides at marriages with words that take hold of the upper world,whilst one eye is prowling in the cellar; so that its gravest discoursehas a savor of hams and powdering-tubs. Worst, when this sensualismintrudes into the education of young women, and withers the hope andaffection of human nature by teaching that marriage signifies nothingbut a housewife's thrift, and that woman's life has no other aim.
But this dream of love, though beautiful, is only one scene in ourplay. In the procession of the soul from within outward, it enlargesits circles ever, like the pebble thrown into the pond, or the lightproceeding from an orb. The rays of the soul alight first on thingsnearest, on every utensil and toy, on nurses and domestics, on the houseand yard and passengers, on the circle of household acquaintance,on politics and geography and history. But things are ever groupingthemselves according to higher or more interior laws. Neighborhood,size, numbers, habits, persons, lose by degrees their power over us.Cause and effect, real affinities, the longing for harmony betweenthe soul and the circumstance, the progressive, idealizing instinct,predominate later, and the step backward from the higher to the lowerrelations is impossible. Thus even love, which is the deification ofpersons, must become more impersonal every day. Of this at first itgives no hint. Little think the youth and maiden who are glancingat each other across crowded rooms with eyes so full of mutualintelligence, of the precious fruit long hereafter to proceed from thisnew, quite external stimulus. The work of vegetation begins first in theirritability of the bark and leaf-buds. From exchanging glances, theyadvance to acts of courtesy, of gallantry, then to fiery passion, toplighting troth and marriage. Passion beholds its object as a perfectunit. The soul is wholly embodied, and the body is wholly ensouled:--
          "Her pure and eloquent blood           Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinctly wrought,           That one might almost say her body thought."
Romeo, if dead, should be cut up into little stars to make the heavensfine. Life, with this pair, has no other aim, asks no more, thanJuliet,--than Romeo. Night, day, studies, talents, kingdoms, religion,are all contained in this form full of soul, in this soul which isall form. The lovers delight in endearments, in avowals of love, incomparisons of their regards. When alone, they solace themselves withthe remembered image of the other. Does that other see the same star,the same melting cloud, read the same book, feel the same emotion, thatnow delight me? They try and weigh their affection, and adding up costlyadvantages, friends, opportunities, properties, exult in discoveringthat willingly, joyfully, they would give all as a ransom for thebeautiful, the beloved head, not one hair of which shall be harmed.But the lot of humanity is on these children. Danger, sorrow, and painarrive to them, as to all. Love prays. It makes covenants with EternalPower in behalf of this dear mate. The union which is thus effected andwhich adds a new value to every atom in nature--for it transmutes everythread throughout the whole web of relation into a golden ray, andbathes the soul in a new and sweeter element--is yet a temporary state.Not always can flowers, pearls, poetry, protestations, nor even home inanother heart, content the awful soul that dwells in clay. It arousesitself at last from these endearments, as toys, and puts on the harnessand aspires to vast and universal aims. The soul which is in the soulof each, craving a perfect beatitude, detects incongruities, defectsand disproportion in the behavior of the other. Hence arise surprise,expostulation and pain. Yet that which drew them to each other was signsof loveliness, signs of virtue; and these virtues are there, howevereclipsed. They appear and reappear and continue to attract; but theregard changes, quits the sign and attaches to the substance. Thisrepairs the wounded affection. Meantime, as life wears on, it provesa game of permutation and combination of all possible positions of theparties, to employ all the resources of each and acquaint each with thestrength and weakness of the other. For it is the nature and end of thisrelation, that they should represent the human race to each other.All that is in the world, which is or ought to be known, is cunninglywrought into the texture of man, of woman:--
          "The person love does to us fit,           Like manna, has the taste of all in it."
The world rolls; the circumstances vary every hour. The angels thatinhabit this temple of the body appear at the windows, and the gnomesand vices also. By all the virtues they are united. If there be virtue,all the vices are known as such; they confess and flee. Their onceflaming regard is sobered by time in either breast, and losingin violence what it gains in extent, it becomes a thorough goodunderstanding. They resign each other without complaint to the goodoffices which man and woman are severally appointed to discharge intime, and exchange the passion which once could not lose sight of itsobject, for a cheerful, disengaged furtherance, whether present orabsent, of each other's designs. At last they discover that all which atfirst drew them together,--those once sacred features, that magical playof charms,--was deciduous, had a prospective end, like the scaffoldingby which the house was built; and the purification of the intellect andthe heart from year to year is the real marriage, foreseen and preparedfrom the first, and wholly above their consciousness. Looking atthese aims with which two persons, a man and a woman, so variously andcorrelatively gifted, are shut up in one house to spend in the nuptialsociety forty or fifty years, I do not wonder at the emphasis with whichthe heart prophesies this crisis from early infancy, at the profusebeauty with which the instincts deck the nuptial bower, and nature andintellect and art emulate each other in the gifts and the melody theybring to the epithalamium.
Thus are we put in training for a love which knows not sex, nor person,nor partiality, but which seeks virtue and wisdom everywhere, to the endof increasing virtue and wisdom. We are by nature observers, and therebylearners. That is our permanent state. But we are often made to feelthat our affections are but tents of a night. Though slowly and withpain, the objects of the affections change, as the objects of thoughtdo. There are moments when the affections rule and absorb the man andmake his happiness dependent on a person or persons. But in healththe mind is presently seen again,--its overarching vault, bright withgalaxies of immutable lights, and the warm loves and fears that sweptover us as clouds must lose their finite character and blend with God,to attain their own perfection. But we need not fear that we can loseany thing by the progress of the soul. The soul may be trusted to theend. That which is so beautiful and attractive as these relations, mustbe succeeded and supplanted only by what is more beautiful, and so onfor ever.
*****


     FRIENDSHIP.
     A RUDDY drop of manly blood     The surging sea outweighs;     The world uncertain comes and goes,     The lover rooted stays.     I fancied he was fled,     And, after many a year,     Glowed unexhausted kindliness     Like daily sunrise there.     My careful heart was free again,--     O friend, my bosom said,     Through thee alone the sky is arched,     Through thee the rose is red,     All things through thee take nobler form     And look beyond the earth,     The mill-round of our fate appears     A sun-path in thy worth.     Me too thy nobleness has taught     To master my despair;     The fountains of my hidden life     Are through thy friendship fair.



VI. FRIENDSHIP.
We have a great deal more kindness than is ever spoken. Maugre allthe selfishness that chills like east winds the world, the whole humanfamily is bathed with an element of love like a fine ether. How manypersons we meet in houses, whom we scarcely speak to, whom yet we honor,and who honor us! How many we see in the street, or sit with in church,whom, though silently, we warmly rejoice to be with! Read the languageof these wandering eye-beams. The heart knoweth.
The effect of the indulgence of this human affection is a certaincordial exhilaration. In poetry and in common speech, the emotions ofbenevolence and complacency which are felt towards others are likened tothe material effects of fire; so swift, or much more swift, more active,more cheering, are these fine inward irradiations. From the highestdegree of passionate love to the lowest degree of good-will, they makethe sweetness of life.
Our intellectual and active powers increase with our affection. Thescholar sits down to write, and all his years of meditation do notfurnish him with one good thought or happy expression; but it isnecessary to write a letter to a friend,--and forthwith troops of gentlethoughts invest themselves, on every hand, with chosen words. See, inany house where virtue and self-respect abide, the palpitation whichthe approach of a stranger causes. A commended stranger is expected andannounced, and an uneasiness betwixt pleasure and pain invades all thehearts of a household. His arrival almost brings fear to the good heartsthat would welcome him. The house is dusted, all things fly into theirplaces, the old coat is exchanged for the new, and they must get up adinner if they can. Of a commended stranger, only the good report istold by others, only the good and new is heard by us. He stands to usfor humanity. He is what we wish. Having imagined and invested him, weask how we should stand related in conversation and action with such aman, and are uneasy with fear. The same idea exalts conversation withhim. We talk better than we are wont. We have the nimblest fancy, aricher memory, and our dumb devil has taken leave for the time. Forlong hours we can continue a series of sincere, graceful, richcommunications, drawn from the oldest, secretest experience, so thatthey who sit by, of our own kinsfolk and acquaintance, shall feel alively surprise at our unusual powers. But as soon as the strangerbegins to intrude his partialities, his definitions, his defects, intothe conversation, it is all over. He has heard the first, the lastand best he will ever hear from us. He is no stranger now. Vulgarity,ignorance, misapprehension are old acquaintances. Now, when he comes, hemay get the order, the dress and the dinner,--but the throbbing of theheart and the communications of the soul, no more.
What is so pleasant as these jets of affection which make a young worldfor me again? What so delicious as a just and firm encounter of two,in a thought, in a feeling? How beautiful, on their approach to thisbeating heart, the steps and forms of the gifted and the true! Themoment we indulge our affections, the earth is metamorphosed; there isno winter and no night; all tragedies, all ennuis vanish,--all dutieseven; nothing fills the proceeding eternity but the forms all radiant ofbeloved persons. Let the soul be assured that somewhere in the universeit should rejoin its friend, and it would be content and cheerful alonefor a thousand years.
I awoke this morning with devout thanksgiving for my friends, the oldand the new. Shall I not call God the Beautiful, who daily showethhimself so to me in his gifts? I chide society, I embrace solitude, andyet I am not so ungrateful as not to see the wise, the lovely and thenoble-minded, as from time to time they pass my gate. Who hears me, whounderstands me, becomes mine,--a possession for all time. Nor is Natureso poor but she gives me this joy several times, and thus we weavesocial threads of our own, a new web of relations; and, as many thoughtsin succession substantiate themselves, we shall by and by stand in anew world of our own creation, and no longer strangers and pilgrims ina traditionary globe. My friends have come to me unsought. The great Godgave them to me. By oldest right, by the divine affinity of virtue withitself, I find them, or rather not I but the Deity in me and in themderides and cancels the thick walls of individual character, relation,age, sex, circumstance, at which he usually connives, and now makes manyone. High thanks I owe you, excellent lovers, who carry out the worldfor me to new and noble depths, and enlarge the meaning of all mythoughts. These are new poetry of the first Bard,--poetry withoutstop,--hymn, ode and epic, poetry still flowing, Apollo and the Museschanting still. Will these too separate themselves from me again, orsome of them? I know not, but I fear it not; for my relation to themis so pure, that we hold by simple affinity, and the Genius of my lifebeing thus social, the same affinity will exert its energy on whomsoeveris as noble as these men and women, wherever I may be.
I confess to an extreme tenderness of nature on this point. It is almostdangerous to me to "crush the sweet poison of misused wine" of theaffections. A new person is to me a great event and hinders me fromsleep. I have often had fine fancies about persons which have givenme delicious hours; but the joy ends in the day; it yields no fruit.Thought is not born of it; my action is very little modified. I mustfeel pride in my friend's accomplishments as if they were mine, and aproperty in his virtues. I feel as warmly when he is praised, as thelover when he hears applause of his engaged maiden. We over-estimate theconscience of our friend. His goodness seems better than our goodness,his nature finer, his temptations less. Every thing that is his,--hisname, his form, his dress, books and instruments,--fancy enhances. Ourown thought sounds new and larger from his mouth.
Yet the systole and diastole of the heart are not without their analogyin the ebb and flow of love. Friendship, like the immortality of thesoul, is too good to be believed. The lover, beholding his maiden, halfknows that she is not verily that which he worships; and in the goldenhour of friendship we are surprised with shades of suspicion andunbelief. We doubt that we bestow on our hero the virtues in which heshines, and afterwards worship the form to which we have ascribed thisdivine inhabitation. In strictness, the soul does not respect men asit respects itself. In strict science all persons underlie the samecondition of an infinite remoteness. Shall we fear to cool our love bymining for the metaphysical foundation of this Elysian temple? Shall Inot be as real as the things I see? If I am, I shall not fear to knowthem for what they are. Their essence is not less beautiful than theirappearance, though it needs finer organs for its apprehension. Theroot of the plant is not unsightly to science, though for chaplets andfestoons we cut the stem short. And I must hazard the production ofthe bald fact amidst these pleasing reveries, though it should prove anEgyptian skull at our banquet. A man who stands united with his thoughtconceives magnificently of himself. He is conscious of a universalsuccess, even though bought by uniform particular failures. Noadvantages, no powers, no gold or force, can be any match for him. Icannot choose but rely on my own poverty more than on your wealth.I cannot make your consciousness tantamount to mine. Only the stardazzles; the planet has a faint, moon-like ray. I hear what you say ofthe admirable parts and tried temper of the party you praise, but I seewell that for all his purple cloaks I shall not like him, unless he isat last a poor Greek like me. I cannot deny it, O friend, that the vastshadow of the Phenomenal includes thee also in its pied and paintedimmensity,--thee also, compared with whom all else is shadow. Thou artnot Being, as Truth is, as Justice is,--thou art not my soul, but apicture and effigy of that. Thou hast come to me lately, and alreadythou art seizing thy hat and cloak. Is it not that the soul puts forthfriends as the tree puts forth leaves, and presently, by the germinationof new buds, extrudes the old leaf? The law of nature is alternationfor evermore. Each electrical state superinduces the opposite. Thesoul environs itself with friends that it may enter into a granderself-acquaintance or solitude; and it goes alone for a season, that itmay exalt its conversation or society. This method betrays itself alongthe whole history of our personal relations. The instinct of affectionrevives the hope of union with our mates, and the returning sense ofinsulation recalls us from the chase. Thus every man passes his life inthe search after friendship, and if he should record his true sentiment,he might write a letter like this to each new candidate for his love:--
DEAR FRIEND,
If I was sure of thee, sure of thy capacity, sure to match my mood withthine, I should never think again of trifles in relation to thy comingsand goings. I am not very wise; my moods are quite attainable, andI respect thy genius; it is to me as yet unfathomed; yet dare I notpresume in thee a perfect intelligence of me, and so thou art to me adelicious torment. Thine ever, or never.
Yet these uneasy pleasures and fine pains are for curiosity and notfor life. They are not to be indulged. This is to weave cobweb, and notcloth. Our friendships hurry to short and poor conclusions, because wehave made them a texture of wine and dreams, instead of the tough fibreof the human heart. The laws of friendship are austere and eternal, ofone web with the laws of nature and of morals. But we have aimed at aswift and petty benefit, to suck a sudden sweetness. We snatch at theslowest fruit in the whole garden of God, which many summers andmany winters must ripen. We seek our friend not sacredly, but with anadulterate passion which would appropriate him to ourselves. In vain. Weare armed all over with subtle antagonisms, which, as soon as we meet,begin to play, and translate all poetry into stale prose. Almost allpeople descend to meet. All association must be a compromise, and,what is worst, the very flower and aroma of the flower of each ofthe beautiful natures disappears as they approach each other. What aperpetual disappointment is actual society, even of the virtuous andgifted! After interviews have been compassed with long foresight wemust be tormented presently by baffled blows, by sudden, unseasonableapathies, by epilepsies of wit and of animal spirits, in the heydayof friendship and thought. Our faculties do not play us true, and bothparties are relieved by solitude.
I ought to be equal to every relation. It makes no difference how manyfriends I have and what content I can find in conversing with each, ifthere be one to whom I am not equal. If I have shrunk unequal from onecontest, the joy I find in all the rest becomes mean and cowardly. Ishould hate myself, if then I made my other friends my asylum:--
          "The valiant warrior famoused for fight,           After a hundred victories, once foiled,           Is from the book of honor razed quite,           And all the rest forgot for which he toiled."
Our impatience is thus sharply rebuked. Bashfulness and apathy are atough husk in which a delicate organization is protected from prematureripening. It would be lost if it knew itself before any of thebest souls were yet ripe enough to know and own it. Respect thenaturlangsamkeit which hardens the ruby in a million years, and worksin duration in which Alps and Andes come and go as rainbows. The goodspirit of our life has no heaven which is the price of rashness. Love,which is the essence of God, is not for levity, but for the total worthof man. Let us not have this childish luxury in our regards, but theausterest worth; let us approach our friend with an audacious trust inthe truth of his heart, in the breadth, impossible to be overturned, ofhis foundations.
The attractions of this subject are not to be resisted, and I leave, forthe time, all account of subordinate social benefit, to speak of thatselect and sacred relation which is a kind of absolute, and which evenleaves the language of love suspicious and common, so much is thispurer, and nothing is so much divine.
I do not wish to treat friendships daintily, but with roughest courage.When they are real, they are not glass threads or frostwork, but thesolidest thing we know. For now, after so many ages of experience, whatdo we know of nature or of ourselves? Not one step has man taken towardthe solution of the problem of his destiny. In one condemnation of follystand the whole universe of men. But the sweet sincerity of joy andpeace which I draw from this alliance with my brother's soul is the nutitself whereof all nature and all thought is but the husk and shell.Happy is the house that shelters a friend! It might well be built, likea festal bower or arch, to entertain him a single day. Happier, if heknow the solemnity of that relation and honor its law! He who offershimself a candidate for that covenant comes up, like an Olympian, to thegreat games where the first-born of the world are the competitors.He proposes himself for contests where Time, Want, Danger, are in thelists, and he alone is victor who has truth enough in his constitutionto preserve the delicacy of his beauty from the wear and tear of allthese. The gifts of fortune may be present or absent, but all the speedin that contest depends on intrinsic nobleness and the contemptof trifles. There are two elements that go to the composition offriendship, each so sovereign that I can detect no superiority ineither, no reason why either should be first named. One is truth. Afriend is a person with whom I may be sincere. Before him I may thinkaloud. I am arrived at last in the presence of a man so real andequal that I may drop even those undermost garments of dissimulation,courtesy, and second thought, which men never put off, and may deal withhim with the simplicity and wholeness with which one chemical atom meetsanother. Sincerity is the luxury allowed, like diadems and authority,only to the highest rank; that being permitted to speak truth, as havingnone above it to court or conform unto. Every man alone is sincere. Atthe entrance of a second person, hypocrisy begins. We parry and fend theapproach of our fellow-man by compliments, by gossip, by amusements, byaffairs. We cover up our thought from him under a hundred folds. I knewa man who under a certain religious frenzy cast off this drapery, andomitting all compliment and commonplace, spoke to the conscience ofevery person he encountered, and that with great insight and beauty. Atfirst he was resisted, and all men agreed he was mad. But persisting--asindeed he could not help doing--for some time in this course, heattained to the advantage of bringing every man of his acquaintance intotrue relations with him. No man would think of speaking falsely withhim, or of putting him off with any chat of markets or reading-rooms.But every man was constrained by so much sincerity to the likeplaindealing, and what love of nature, what poetry, what symbol of truthhe had, he did certainly show him. But to most of us society shows notits face and eye, but its side and its back. To stand in true relationswith men in a false age is worth a fit of insanity, is it not? Wecan seldom go erect. Almost every man we meet requires somecivility,--requires to be humored; he has some fame, some talent,some whim of religion or philanthropy in his head that is not to bequestioned, and which spoils all conversation with him. But a friend isa sane man who exercises not my ingenuity, but me. My friend gives meentertainment without requiring any stipulation on my part. A friendtherefore is a sort of paradox in nature. I who alone am, I who seenothing in nature whose existence I can affirm with equal evidence to myown, behold now the semblance of my being, in all its height, variety,and curiosity, reiterated in a foreign form; so that a friend may wellbe reckoned the masterpiece of nature.
The other element of friendship is tenderness. We are holden to men byevery sort of tie, by blood, by pride, by fear, by hope, by lucre,by lust, by hate, by admiration, by every circumstance and badge andtrifle,--but we can scarce believe that so much character can subsist inanother as to draw us by love. Can another be so blessed and we so purethat we can offer him tenderness? When a man becomes dear to me I havetouched the goal of fortune. I find very little written directly to theheart of this matter in books. And yet I have one text which I cannotchoose but remember. My author says,--"I offer myself faintly andbluntly to those whose I effectually am, and tender myself least to himto whom I am the most devoted." I wish that friendship should havefeet, as well as eyes and eloquence. It must plant itself on the ground,before it vaults over the moon. I wish it to be a little of a citizen,before it is quite a cherub. We chide the citizen because he makes lovea commodity. It is an exchange of gifts, of useful loans; it is goodneighborhood; it watches with the sick; it holds the pall at thefuneral; and quite loses sight of the delicacies and nobility of therelation. But though we cannot find the god under this disguise of asutler, yet on the other hand we cannot forgive the poet if he spins histhread too fine and does not substantiate his romance by the municipalvirtues of justice, punctuality, fidelity and pity. I hate theprostitution of the name of friendship to signify modish and worldlyalliances. I much prefer the company of ploughboys and tin-peddlers tothe silken and perfumed amity which celebrates its days of encounterby a frivolous display, by rides in a curricle and dinners at the besttaverns. The end of friendship is a commerce the most strict and homelythat can be joined; more strict than any of which we have experience.It is for aid and comfort through all the relations and passages oflife and death. It is fit for serene days and graceful gifts and countryrambles, but also for rough roads and hard fare, shipwreck, poverty,and persecution. It keeps company with the sallies of the wit and thetrances of religion. We are to dignify to each other the daily needs andoffices of man's life, and embellish it by courage, wisdom and unity. Itshould never fall into something usual and settled, but should be alertand inventive and add rhyme and reason to what was drudgery.
Friendship may be said to require natures so rare and costly, each sowell tempered and so happily adapted, and withal so circumstanced (foreven in that particular, a poet says, love demands that the parties bealtogether paired), that its satisfaction can very seldom be assured. Itcannot subsist in its perfection, say some of those who are learned inthis warm lore of the heart, betwixt more than two. I am not quiteso strict in my terms, perhaps because I have never known so high afellowship as others. I please my imagination more with a circle ofgodlike men and women variously related to each other and betweenwhom subsists a lofty intelligence. But I find this law of one to oneperemptory for conversation, which is the practice and consummation offriendship. Do not mix waters too much. The best mix as ill as good andbad. You shall have very useful and cheering discourse at several timeswith two several men, but let all three of you come together and youshall not have one new and hearty word. Two may talk and one may hear,but three cannot take part in a conversation of the most sincere andsearching sort. In good company there is never such discourse betweentwo, across the table, as takes place when you leave them alone. In goodcompany the individuals merge their egotism into a social soul exactlyco-extensive with the several consciousnesses there present. Nopartialities of friend to friend, no fondnesses of brother to sister, ofwife to husband, are there pertinent, but quite otherwise. Only he maythen speak who can sail on the common thought of the party, and notpoorly limited to his own. Now this convention, which good sensedemands, destroys the high freedom of great conversation, which requiresan absolute running of two souls into one.
No two men but being left alone with each other enter into simplerrelations. Yet it is affinity that determines which two shall converse.Unrelated men give little joy to each other, will never suspectthe latent powers of each. We talk sometimes of a great talent forconversation, as if it were a permanent property in some individuals.Conversation is an evanescent relation,--no more. A man is reputed tohave thought and eloquence; he cannot, for all that, say a word to hiscousin or his uncle. They accuse his silence with as much reason as theywould blame the insignificance of a dial in the shade. In the sun itwill mark the hour. Among those who enjoy his thought he will regain histongue.
Friendship requires that rare mean betwixt likeness and unlikenessthat piques each with the presence of power and of consent in the otherparty. Let me be alone to the end of the world, rather than that myfriend should overstep, by a word or a look, his real sympathy. I amequally balked by antagonism and by compliance. Let him not cease aninstant to be himself. The only joy I have in his being mine, is thatthe not mine is mine. I hate, where I looked for a manly furtherance, orat least a manly resistance, to find a mush of concession. Better bea nettle in the side of your friend than his echo. The condition whichhigh friendship demands is ability to do without it. That high officerequires great and sublime parts. There must be very two, before therecan be very one. Let it be an alliance of two large, formidable natures,mutually beheld, mutually feared, before yet they recognize the deepidentity which, beneath these disparities, unites them.
He only is fit for this society who is magnanimous; who is surethat greatness and goodness are always economy; who is not swift tointermeddle with his fortunes. Let him not intermeddle with this. Leaveto the diamond its ages to grow, nor expect to accelerate the birthsof the eternal. Friendship demands a religious treatment. We talk ofchoosing our friends, but friends are self-elected. Reverence is a greatpart of it. Treat your friend as a spectacle. Of course he has meritsthat are not yours, and that you cannot honor if you must needs holdhim close to your person. Stand aside; give those merits room; let themmount and expand. Are you the friend of your friend's buttons, or ofhis thought? To a great heart he will still be a stranger in a thousandparticulars, that he may come near in the holiest ground. Leave it togirls and boys to regard a friend as property, and to suck a short andall-confounding pleasure, instead of the noblest benefit.
Let us buy our entrance to this guild by a long probation. Why should wedesecrate noble and beautiful souls by intruding on them? Why insist onrash personal relations with your friend? Why go to his house, or knowhis mother and brother and sisters? Why be visited by him at your own?Are these things material to our covenant? Leave this touching andclawing. Let him be to me a spirit. A message, a thought, a sincerity,a glance from him, I want, but not news, nor pottage. I can get politicsand chat and neighborly conveniences from cheaper companions. Should notthe society of my friend be to me poetic, pure, universal and great asnature itself? Ought I to feel that our tie is profane in comparisonwith yonder bar of cloud that sleeps on the horizon, or that clump ofwaving grass that divides the brook? Let us not vilify, but raise it tothat standard. That great defying eye, that scornful beauty of his mienand action, do not pique yourself on reducing, but rather fortify andenhance. Worship his superiorities; wish him not less by a thought, buthoard and tell them all. Guard him as thy counterpart. Let him be tothee for ever a sort of beautiful enemy, untamable, devoutly revered,and not a trivial conveniency to be soon outgrown and cast aside. Thehues of the opal, the light of the diamond, are not to be seen if theeye is too near. To my friend I write a letter and from him I receivea letter. That seems to you a little. It suffices me. It is a spiritualgift worthy of him to give and of me to receive. It profanes nobody.In these warm lines the heart will trust itself, as it will not to thetongue, and pour out the prophecy of a godlier existence than all theannals of heroism have yet made good.
Respect so far the holy laws of this fellowship as not to prejudice itsperfect flower by your impatience for its opening. We must be our ownbefore we can be another's. There is at least this satisfaction incrime, according to the Latin proverb;--you can speak to your accompliceon even terms. Crimen quos inquinat, aequat. To those whom we admireand love, at first we cannot. Yet the least defect of self-possessionvitiates, in my judgment, the entire relation. There can never be deeppeace between two spirits, never mutual respect, until in their dialogueeach stands for the whole world.
What is so great as friendship, let us carry with what grandeur ofspirit we can. Let us be silent,--so we may hear the whisper of thegods. Let us not interfere. Who set you to cast about what you shouldsay to the select souls, or how to say any thing to such? No matterhow ingenious, no matter how graceful and bland. There are innumerabledegrees of folly and wisdom, and for you to say aught is to befrivolous. Wait, and thy heart shall speak. Wait until the necessary andeverlasting overpowers you, until day and night avail themselves of yourlips. The only reward of virtue is virtue; the only way to have a friendis to be one. You shall not come nearer a man by getting into his house.If unlike, his soul only flees the faster from you, and you shall nevercatch a true glance of his eye. We see the noble afar off and theyrepel us; why should we intrude? Late,--very late,--we perceive thatno arrangements, no introductions, no consuetudes or habits of societywould be of any avail to establish us in such relations with them as wedesire,--but solely the uprise of nature in us to the same degree it isin them; then shall we meet as water with water; and if we should notmeet them then, we shall not want them, for we are already they. In thelast analysis, love is only the reflection of a man's own worthinessfrom other men. Men have sometimes exchanged names with their friends,as if they would signify that in their friend each loved his own soul.
The higher the style we demand of friendship, of course the less easy toestablish it with flesh and blood. We walk alone in the world. Friendssuch as we desire are dreams and fables. But a sublime hope cheers everthe faithful heart, that elsewhere, in other regions of the universalpower, souls are now acting, enduring, and daring, which can love usand which we can love. We may congratulate ourselves that the period ofnonage, of follies, of blunders and of shame, is passed in solitude, andwhen we are finished men we shall grasp heroic hands in heroic hands.Only be admonished by what you already see, not to strike leaguesof friendship with cheap persons, where no friendship can be. Ourimpatience betrays us into rash and foolish alliances which no godattends. By persisting in your path, though you forfeit the little yougain the great. You demonstrate yourself, so as to put yourself out ofthe reach of false relations, and you draw to you the first-born of theworld,--those rare pilgrims whereof only one or two wander in natureat once, and before whom the vulgar great show as spectres and shadowsmerely.
It is foolish to be afraid of making our ties too spiritual, as if so wecould lose any genuine love. Whatever correction of our popular views wemake from insight, nature will be sure to bear us out in, and though itseem to rob us of some joy, will repay us with a greater. Let us feel ifwe will the absolute insulation of man. We are sure that we have allin us. We go to Europe, or we pursue persons, or we read books, inthe instinctive faith that these will call it out and reveal us toourselves. Beggars all. The persons are such as we; the Europe, an oldfaded garment of dead persons; the books, their ghosts. Let us drop thisidolatry. Let us give over this mendicancy. Let us even bid our dearestfriends farewell, and defy them, saying, 'Who are you? Unhand me: I willbe dependent no more.' Ah! seest thou not, O brother, that thus we partonly to meet again on a higher platform, and only be more each other'sbecause we are more our own? A friend is Janus-faced; he looks to thepast and the future. He is the child of all my foregoing hours, theprophet of those to come, and the harbinger of a greater friend.
I do then with my friends as I do with my books. I would have them whereI can find them, but I seldom use them. We must have society on our ownterms, and admit or exclude it on the slightest cause. I cannot affordto speak much with my friend. If he is great he makes me so great thatI cannot descend to converse. In the great days, presentiments hoverbefore me in the firmament. I ought then to dedicate myself to them. Igo in that I may seize them, I go out that I may seize them. I fear onlythat I may lose them receding into the sky in which now they are onlya patch of brighter light. Then, though I prize my friends, I cannotafford to talk with them and study their visions, lest I lose my own. Itwould indeed give me a certain household joy to quit this lofty seeking,this spiritual astronomy or search of stars, and come down to warmsympathies with you; but then I know well I shall mourn always thevanishing of my mighty gods. It is true, next week I shall have languidmoods, when I can well afford to occupy myself with foreign objects;then I shall regret the lost literature of your mind, and wish you wereby my side again. But if you come, perhaps you will fill my mind onlywith new visions; not with yourself but with your lustres, and I shallnot be able any more than now to converse with you. So I will owe to myfriends this evanescent intercourse. I will receive from them not whatthey have but what they are. They shall give me that which properly theycannot give, but which emanates from them. But they shall not hold me byany relations less subtile and pure. We will meet as though we met not,and part as though we parted not.
It has seemed to me lately more possible than I knew, to carry afriendship greatly, on one side, without due correspondence on theother. Why should I cumber myself with regrets that the receiver is notcapacious? It never troubles the sun that some of his rays fall wideand vain into ungrateful space, and only a small part on the reflectingplanet. Let your greatness educate the crude and cold companion. If heis unequal he will presently pass away; but thou art enlarged by thy ownshining, and no longer a mate for frogs and worms, dost soar andburn with the gods of the empyrean. It is thought a disgrace to loveunrequited. But the great will see that true love cannot be unrequited.True love transcends the unworthy object and dwells and broods on theeternal, and when the poor interposed mask crumbles, it is not sad, butfeels rid of so much earth and feels its independency the surer. Yetthese things may hardly be said without a sort of treachery to therelation. The essence of friendship is entireness, a total magnanimityand trust. It must not surmise or provide for infirmity. It treats itsobject as a god, that it may deify both.
*****


     PRUDENCE.
     THEME no poet gladly sung,     Fair to old and foul to young;     Scorn not thou the love of parts,     And the articles of arts.     Grandeur of the perfect sphere     Thanks the atoms that cohere.



VII. PRUDENCE.
What right have I to write on Prudence, whereof I have Little, andthat of the negative sort? My prudence consists in avoiding and goingwithout, not in the inventing of means and methods, not in adroitsteering, not in gentle repairing. I have no skill to make money spendwell, no genius in my economy, and whoever sees my garden discovers thatI must have some other garden. Yet I love facts, and hate lubricityand people without perception. Then I have the same title to writeon prudence that I have to write on poetry or holiness. We write fromaspiration and antagonism, as well as from experience. We paint thosequalities which we do not possess. The poet admires the man of energyand tactics; the merchant breeds his son for the church or the bar; andwhere a man is not vain and egotistic you shall find what he has notby his praise. Moreover it would be hardly honest in me not to balancethese fine lyric words of Love and Friendship with words of coarsersound, and whilst my debt to my senses is real and constant, not to ownit in passing.
Prudence is the virtue of the senses. It is the science of appearances.It is the outmost action of the inward life. It is God taking thoughtfor oxen. It moves matter after the laws of matter. It is content toseek health of body by complying with physical conditions, and health ofmind by the laws of the intellect.
The world of the senses is a world of shows; it does not exist foritself, but has a symbolic character; and a true prudence or law ofshows recognizes the co-presence of other laws and knows that its ownoffice is subaltern; knows that it is surface and not centre where itworks. Prudence is false when detached. It is legitimate when it is theNatural History of the soul incarnate, when it unfolds the beauty oflaws within the narrow scope of the senses.
There are all degrees of proficiency in knowledge of the world. It issufficient to our present purpose to indicate three. One class live tothe utility of the symbol, esteeming health and wealth a final good.Another class live above this mark to the beauty of the symbol, as thepoet and artist and the naturalist and man of science. A thirdclass live above the beauty of the symbol to the beauty of the thingsignified; these are wise men. The first class have common sense; thesecond, taste; and the third, spiritual perception. Once in a long time,a man traverses the whole scale, and sees and enjoys the symbol solidly,then also has a clear eye for its beauty, and lastly, whilst he pitcheshis tent on this sacred volcanic isle of nature, does not offer to buildhouses and barns thereon,--reverencing the splendor of the God which hesees bursting through each chink and cranny.
The world is filled with the proverbs and acts and winkings of a baseprudence, which is a devotion to matter, as if we possessed no otherfaculties than the palate, the nose, the touch, the eye and ear; aprudence which adores the Rule of Three, which never subscribes, whichnever gives, which seldom lends, and asks but one question of anyproject,--Will it bake bread? This is a disease like a thickening of theskin until the vital organs are destroyed. But culture, revealing thehigh origin of the apparent world and aiming at the perfection of theman as the end, degrades every thing else, as health and bodily life,into means. It sees prudence not to be a several faculty, but a name forwisdom and virtue conversing with the body and its wants. Cultivated menalways feel and speak so, as if a great fortune, the achievement ofa civil or social measure, great personal influence, a graceful andcommanding address, had their value as proofs of the energy of thespirit. If a man lose his balance and immerse himself in any trades orpleasures for their own sake, he may be a good wheel or pin, but he isnot a cultivated man.
The spurious prudence, making the senses final, is the god of sots andcowards, and is the subject of all comedy. It is nature's joke, andtherefore literature's. The true prudence limits this sensualism byadmitting the knowledge of an internal and real world. This recognitiononce made, the order of the world and the distribution of affairs andtimes, being studied with the co-perception of their subordinate place,will reward any degree of attention. For our existence, thus apparentlyattached in nature to the sun and the returning moon and the periodswhich they mark,--so susceptible to climate and to country, so alive tosocial good and evil, so fond of splendor and so tender to hunger andcold and debt,--reads all its primary lessons out of these books.
Prudence does not go behind nature and ask whence it is. It takes thelaws of the world whereby man's being is conditioned, as they are, andkeeps these laws that it may enjoy their proper good. It respects spaceand time, climate, want, sleep, the law of polarity, growth and death.There revolve, to give bound and period to his being on all sides,the sun and moon, the great formalists in the sky: here lies stubbornmatter, and will not swerve from its chemical routine. Here is a plantedglobe, pierced and belted with natural laws and fenced and distributedexternally with civil partitions and properties which impose newrestraints on the young inhabitant.
We eat of the bread which grows in the field. We live by the air whichblows around us and we are poisoned by the air that is too cold or toohot, too dry or too wet. Time, which shows so vacant, indivisible anddivine in its coming, is slit and peddled into trifles and tatters. Adoor is to be painted, a lock to be repaired. I want wood or oil, ormeal or salt; the house smokes, or I have a headache; then the tax, andan affair to be transacted with a man without heart or brains, and thestinging recollection of an injurious or very awkward word,--these eatup the hours. Do what we can, summer will have its flies; if we walk inthe woods we must feed mosquitos; if we go a-fishing we must expect awet coat. Then climate is a great impediment to idle persons; we oftenresolve to give up the care of the weather, but still we regard theclouds and the rain.
We are instructed by these petty experiences which usurp the hours andyears. The hard soil and four months of snow make the inhabitant of thenorthern temperate zone wiser and abler than his fellow who enjoys thefixed smile of the tropics. The islander may ramble all day at will.At night he may sleep on a mat under the moon, and wherever a wilddate-tree grows, nature has, without a prayer even, spread a table forhis morning meal. The northerner is perforce a householder. He mustbrew, bake, salt and preserve his food, and pile wood and coal. Butas it happens that not one stroke can labor lay to without some newacquaintance with nature, and as nature is inexhaustibly significant,the inhabitants of these climates have always excelled the southernerin force. Such is the value of these matters that a man who knowsother things can never know too much of these. Let him have accurateperceptions. Let him, if he have hands, handle; if eyes, measure anddiscriminate; let him accept and hive every fact of chemistry, naturalhistory and economics; the more he has, the less is he willing to spareany one. Time is always bringing the occasions that disclose theirvalue. Some wisdom comes out of every natural and innocent action. Thedomestic man, who loves no music so well as his kitchen clock and theairs which the logs sing to him as they burn on the hearth, has solaceswhich others never dream of. The application of means to ends insuresvictory and the songs of victory not less in a farm or a shop thanin the tactics of party or of war. The good husband finds method asefficient in the packing of fire-wood in a shed or in the harvestingof fruits in the cellar, as in Peninsular campaigns or the files of theDepartment of State. In the rainy day he builds a work-bench, or getshis tool-box set in the corner of the barn-chamber, and stored withnails, gimlet, pincers, screwdriver and chisel. Herein he tastes an oldjoy of youth and childhood, the cat-like love of garrets, presses andcorn-chambers, and of the conveniences of long housekeeping. His gardenor his poultry-yard tells him many pleasant anecdotes. One might findargument for optimism in the abundant flow of this saccharine element ofpleasure in every suburb and extremity of the good world. Let a man keepthe law,--any law,--and his way will be strown with satisfactions. Thereis more difference in the quality of our pleasures than in the amount.
On the other hand, nature punishes any neglect of prudence. If you thinkthe senses final, obey their law. If you believe in the soul, do notclutch at sensual sweetness before it is ripe on the slow tree of causeand effect. It is vinegar to the eyes to deal with men of loose andimperfect perception. Dr. Johnson is reported to have said,--"Ifthe child says he looked out of this window, when he looked out ofthat,--whip him." Our American character is marked by a more thanaverage delight in accurate perception, which is shown by the currencyof the byword, "No mistake." But the discomfort of unpunctuality,of confusion of thought about facts, of inattention to the wants ofto-morrow, is of no nation. The beautiful laws of time and space,once dislocated by our inaptitude, are holes and dens. If the hive bedisturbed by rash and stupid hands, instead of honey it will yieldus bees. Our words and actions to be fair must be timely. A gay andpleasant sound is the whetting of the scythe in the mornings of June,yet what is more lonesome and sad than the sound of a whetstoneor mower's rifle when it is too late in the season to make hay?Scatter-brained and "afternoon" men spoil much more than their ownaffair in spoiling the temper of those who deal with them. I have seena criticism on some paintings, of which I am reminded when I see theshiftless and unhappy men who are not true to their senses. The lastGrand Duke of Weimar, a man of superior understanding, said,--"I havesometimes remarked in the presence of great works of art, and just nowespecially in Dresden, how much a certain property contributes to theeffect which gives life to the figures, and to the life an irresistibletruth. This property is the hitting, in all the figures we draw, theright centre of gravity. I mean the placing the figures firm upon theirfeet, making the hands grasp, and fastening the eyes on the spot wherethey should look. Even lifeless figures, as vessels and stools--let thembe drawn ever so correctly--lose all effect so soon as they lack theresting upon their centre of gravity, and have a certain swimming andoscillating appearance. The Raphael in the Dresden gallery (the onlygreatly affecting picture which I have seen) is the quietest and mostpassionless piece you can imagine; a couple of saints who worship theVirgin and Child. Nevertheless, it awakens a deeper impression thanthe contortions of ten crucified martyrs. For beside all the resistlessbeauty of form, it possesses in the highest degree the property of theperpendicularity of all the figures." This perpendicularity we demand ofall the figures in this picture of life. Let them stand on their feet,and not float and swing. Let us know where to find them. Let themdiscriminate between what they remember and what they dreamed, call aspade a spade, give us facts, and honor their own senses with trust.
But what man shall dare tax another with imprudence? Who is prudent? Themen we call greatest are least in this kingdom. There is a certain fataldislocation in our relation to nature, distorting our modes of livingand making every law our enemy, which seems at last to have aroused allthe wit and virtue in the world to ponder the question of Reform. Wemust call the highest prudence to counsel, and ask why health and beautyand genius should now be the exception rather than the rule of humannature? We do not know the properties of plants and animals and thelaws of nature, through our sympathy with the same; but this remains thedream of poets. Poetry and prudence should be coincident. Poets shouldbe lawgivers; that is, the boldest lyric inspiration should not chideand insult, but should announce and lead the civil code and the day'swork. But now the two things seem irreconcilably parted. We haveviolated law upon law until we stand amidst ruins, and when by chance weespy a coincidence between reason and the phenomena, we are surprised.Beauty should be the dowry of every man and woman, as invariably assensation; but it is rare. Health or sound organization should beuniversal. Genius should be the child of genius and every child shouldbe inspired; but now it is not to be predicted of any child, and nowhereis it pure. We call partial half-lights, by courtesy, genius; talentwhich converts itself to money; talent which glitters to-day that it maydine and sleep well to-morrow; and society is officered by men of parts,as they are properly called, and not by divine men. These use theirgifts to refine luxury, not to abolish it. Genius is always ascetic,and piety, and love. Appetite shows to the finer souls as a disease, andthey find beauty in rites and bounds that resist it.
We have found out fine names to cover our sensuality withal, but nogifts can raise intemperance. The man of talent affects to call histransgressions of the laws of the senses trivial and to count themnothing considered with his devotion to his art. His art never taughthim lewdness, nor the love of wine, nor the wish to reap where he hadnot sowed. His art is less for every deduction from his holiness, andless for every defect of common sense. On him who scorned the world ashe said, the scorned world wreaks its revenge. He that despiseth smallthings will perish by little and little. Goethe's Tasso is very likelyto be a pretty fair historical portrait, and that is true tragedy. Itdoes not seem to me so genuine grief when some tyrannous Richard theThird oppresses and slays a score of innocent persons, as when Antonioand Tasso, both apparently right, wrong each other. One living after themaxims of this world and consistent and true to them, the other firedwith all divine sentiments, yet grasping also at the pleasures of sense,without submitting to their law. That is a grief we all feel, a knot wecannot untie. Tasso's is no infrequent case in modern biography. Aman of genius, of an ardent temperament, reckless of physicallaws, self-indulgent, becomes presently unfortunate, querulous, a"discomfortable cousin," a thorn to himself and to others.
The scholar shames us by his bifold life. Whilst something higher thanprudence is active, he is admirable; when common sense is wanted, he isan encumbrance. Yesterday, Caesar was not so great; to-day, the felonat the gallows' foot is not more miserable. Yesterday, radiant with thelight of an ideal world in which he lives, the first of men; and nowoppressed by wants and by sickness, for which he must thank himself. Heresembles the pitiful drivellers whom travellers describe as frequentingthe bazaars of Constantinople, who skulk about all day, yellow,emaciated, ragged, sneaking; and at evening, when the bazaars are open,slink to the opium-shop, swallow their morsel and become tranquil andglorified seers. And who has not seen the tragedy of imprudent geniusstruggling for years with paltry pecuniary difficulties, at lastsinking, chilled, exhausted and fruitless, like a giant slaughtered bypins?
Is it not better that a man should accept the first pains andmortifications of this sort, which nature is not slack in sending him,as hints that he must expect no other good than the just fruit of hisown labor and self-denial? Health, bread, climate, social position, havetheir importance, and he will give them their due. Let him esteem Naturea perpetual counsellor, and her perfections the exact measure of ourdeviations. Let him make the night night, and the day day. Let himcontrol the habit of expense. Let him see that as much wisdom may beexpended on a private economy as on an empire, and as much wisdom maybe drawn from it. The laws of the world are written out for him on everypiece of money in his hand. There is nothing he will not be thebetter for knowing, were it only the wisdom of Poor Richard, or theState-Street prudence of buying by the acre to sell by the foot; or thethrift of the agriculturist, to stick a tree between whiles, because itwill grow whilst he sleeps; or the prudence which consists in husbandinglittle strokes of the tool, little portions of time, particles of stockand small gains. The eye of prudence may never shut. Iron, if kept atthe ironmonger's, will rust; beer, if not brewed in the right state ofthe atmosphere, will sour; timber of ships will rot at sea, or if laidup high and dry, will strain, warp and dry-rot; money, if kept byus, yields no rent and is liable to loss; if invested, is liable todepreciation of the particular kind of stock. Strike, says the smith,the iron is white; keep the rake, says the haymaker, as nigh the scytheas you can, and the cart as nigh the rake. Our Yankee trade is reputedto be very much on the extreme of this prudence. It takes bank-notes,good, bad, clean, ragged, and saves itself by the speed with which itpasses them off. Iron cannot rust, nor beer sour, nor timber rot, norcalicoes go out of fashion, nor money stocks depreciate, in the fewswift moments in which the Yankee suffers any one of them to remain inhis possession. In skating over thin ice our safety is in our speed.
Let him learn a prudence of a higher strain. Let him learn that everything in nature, even motes and feathers, go by law and not by luck, andthat what he sows he reaps. By diligence and self-command let him putthe bread he eats at his own disposal, that he may not stand in bitterand false relations to other men; for the best good of wealth isfreedom. Let him practise the minor virtues. How much of human life islost in waiting! let him not make his fellow-creatures wait. How manywords and promises are promises of conversation! Let his be words offate. When he sees a folded and sealed scrap of paper float round theglobe in a pine ship and come safe to the eye for which it was written,amidst a swarming population, let him likewise feel the admonition tointegrate his being across all these distracting forces, and keep aslender human word among the storms, distances and accidents that driveus hither and thither, and, by persistency, make the paltry force ofone man reappear to redeem its pledge after months and years in the mostdistant climates.
We must not try to write the laws of any one virtue, looking at thatonly. Human nature loves no contradictions, but is symmetrical. Theprudence which secures an outward well-being is not to be studied by oneset of men, whilst heroism and holiness are studied by another, but theyare reconcilable. Prudence concerns the present time, persons, propertyand existing forms. But as every fact hath its roots in the soul, andif the soul were changed, would cease to be, or would become some otherthing,--the proper administration of outward things will always reston a just apprehension of their cause and origin; that is, the goodman will be the wise man, and the single-hearted the politic man. Everyviolation of truth is not only a sort of suicide in the liar, but isa stab at the health of human society. On the most profitable lie thecourse of events presently lays a destructive tax; whilst franknessinvites frankness, puts the parties on a convenient footing and makestheir business a friendship. Trust men and they will be true to you;treat them greatly and they will show themselves great, though they makean exception in your favor to all their rules of trade.
So, in regard to disagreeable and formidable things, prudence does notconsist in evasion or in flight, but in courage. He who wishes to walkin the most peaceful parts of life with any serenity must screw himselfup to resolution. Let him front the object of his worst apprehension,and his stoutness will commonly make his fear groundless. TheLatin proverb says, "In battles the eye is first overcome." Entireself-possession may make a battle very little more dangerous to lifethan a match at foils or at football. Examples are cited by soldiers ofmen who have seen the cannon pointed and the fire given to it, and whohave stepped aside from the path of the ball. The terrors of the stormare chiefly confined to the parlor and the cabin. The drover, thesailor, buffets it all day, and his health renews itself at as vigorousa pulse under the sleet as under the sun of June.
In the occurrence of unpleasant things among neighbors, fear comesreadily to heart and magnifies the consequence of the other party;but it is a bad counsellor. Every man is actually weak and apparentlystrong. To himself he seems weak; to others, formidable. You are afraidof Grim; but Grim also is afraid of you. You are solicitous of thegood-will of the meanest person, uneasy at his ill-will. But thesturdiest offender of your peace and of the neighborhood, if you ripup his claims, is as thin and timid as any, and the peace of society isoften kept, because, as children say, one is afraid, and the other daresnot. Far off, men swell, bully and threaten; bring them hand to hand,and they are a feeble folk.
It is a proverb that 'courtesy costs nothing'; but calculation mightcome to value love for its profit. Love is fabled to be blind, butkindness is necessary to perception; love is not a hood, but aneye-water. If you meet a sectary or a hostile partisan, never recognizethe dividing lines, but meet on what common ground remains,--if onlythat the sun shines and the rain rains for both; the area will widenvery fast, and ere you know it, the boundary mountains on which the eyehad fastened have melted into air. If they set out to contend, SaintPaul will lie and Saint John will hate. What low, poor, paltry,hypocritical people an argument on religion will make of the pure andchosen souls! They will shuffle and crow, crook and hide, feign toconfess here, only that they may brag and conquer there, and not athought has enriched either party, and not an emotion of bravery,modesty, or hope. So neither should you put yourself in a falseposition with your contemporaries by indulging a vein of hostility andbitterness. Though your views are in straight antagonism to theirs,assume an identity of sentiment, assume that you are saying preciselythat which all think, and in the flow of wit and love roll out yourparadoxes in solid column, with not the infirmity of a doubt. So atleast shall you get an adequate deliverance. The natural motions of thesoul are so much better than the voluntary ones that you will never doyourself justice in dispute. The thought is not then taken hold of bythe right handle, does not show itself proportioned and in its truebearings, but bears extorted, hoarse, and half witness. But assume aconsent and it shall presently be granted, since really and underneaththeir external diversities, all men are of one heart and mind.
Wisdom will never let us stand with any man or men on an unfriendlyfooting. We refuse sympathy and intimacy with people, as if we waitedfor some better sympathy and intimacy to come. But whence and when?To-morrow will be like to-day. Life wastes itself whilst we arepreparing to live. Our friends and fellow-workers die off from us.Scarcely can we say we see new men, new women, approaching us. We aretoo old to regard fashion, too old to expect patronage of any greateror more powerful. Let us suck the sweetness of those affections andconsuetudes that grow near us. These old shoes are easy to the feet.Undoubtedly we can easily pick faults in our company, can easily whispernames prouder, and that tickle the fancy more. Every man's imaginationhath its friends; and life would be dearer with such companions. But ifyou cannot have them on good mutual terms, you cannot have them. Ifnot the Deity but our ambition hews and shapes the new relations, theirvirtue escapes, as strawberries lose their flavor in garden-beds.
Thus truth, frankness, courage, love, humility and all the virtues rangethemselves on the side of prudence, or the art of securing a presentwell-being. I do not know if all matter will be found to be made of oneelement, as oxygen or hydrogen, at last, but the world of manners andactions is wrought of one stuff, and begin where we will we are prettysure in a short space to be mumbling our ten commandments.
*****


     HEROISM.
     "Paradise is under the shadow of swords."                                   Mahomet.
     RUBY wine is drunk by knaves,     Sugar spends to fatten slaves,     Rose and vine-leaf deck buffoons;     Thunderclouds are Jove's festoons,     Drooping oft in wreaths of dread     Lightning-knotted round his head;     The hero is not fed on sweets,     Daily his own heart he eats;     Chambers of the great are jails,     And head-winds right for royal sails.



VIII. HEROISM.
In the elder English dramatists, and mainly in the plays Of Beaumont andFletcher, there is a constant recognition of gentility, as if a noblebehavior were as easily marked in the society of their age as color isin our American population. When any Rodrigo, Pedro or Valerio enters,though he be a stranger, the duke or governor exclaims, 'This is agentleman,--and proffers civilities without end; but all the rest areslag and refuse. In harmony with this delight in personal advantagesthere is in their plays a certain heroic cast of character anddialogue,--as in Bonduca, Sophocles, the Mad Lover, the DoubleMarriage,--wherein the speaker is so earnest and cordial and onsuch deep grounds of character, that the dialogue, on the slightestadditional incident in the plot, rises naturally into poetry. Among manytexts take the following. The Roman Martius has conquered Athens,--allbut the invincible spirits of Sophocles, the duke of Athens, andDorigen, his wife. The beauty of the latter inflames Martius, and heseeks to save her husband; but Sophocles will not ask his life, althoughassured that a word will save him, and the execution of both proceeds:--
     Valerius. Bid thy wife farewell.
     Soph. No, I will take no leave. My Dorigen,     Yonder, above, 'bout Ariadne's crown,     My spirit shall hover for thee. Prithee, haste.
     Dor. Stay, Sophocles,--with this tie up my sight;     Let not soft nature so transformed be,     And lose her gentler sexed humanity,     To make me see my lord bleed. So, 'tis well;     Never one object underneath the sun     Will I behold before my Sophocles:     Farewell; now teach the Romans how to die.
     Mar. Dost know what 't is to die?
     Soph. Thou dost not, Martius,     And, therefore, not what 'tis to live; to die     Is to begin to live. It is to end     An old, stale, weary work, and to commence     A newer and a better. 'Tis to leave     Deceitful knaves for the society     Of gods and goodness. Thou thyself must part     At last from all thy garlands, pleasures, triumphs,     And prove thy fortitude what then 't will do.
     Val. But art not grieved nor vexed to leave thy life thus?
     Soph. Why should I grieve or vex for being sent     To them I ever loved best? Now I'll kneel,     But with my back toward thee; 'tis the last duty     This trunk can do the gods.
     Mar. Strike, strike, Valerius,     Or Martius' heart will leap out at his mouth.     This is a man, a woman. Kiss thy lord,     And live with all the freedom you were wont.     O love! thou doubly hast afflicted me     With virtue and with beauty. Treacherous heart,     My hand shall cast thee quick into my urn,     Ere thou transgress this knot of piety.
     Val. What ails my brother?
     Soph. Martius, O Martius,     Thou now hast found a way to conquer me.
     Dor. O star of Rome! what gratitude can speak     Fit words to follow such a deed as this?
     Mar. This admirable duke, Valerius,     With his disdain of fortune and of death,     Captived himself, has captivated me,     And though my arm hath ta'en his body here,     His soul hath subjugated Martius' soul.     By Romulus, he is all soul, I think;     He hath no flesh, and spirit cannot be gyved;     Then we have vanquished nothing; he is free,     And Martius walks now in captivity.
I do not readily remember any poem, play, sermon, novel, or oration thatour press vents in the last few years, which goes to the same tune. Wehave a great many flutes and flageolets, but not often the sound ofany fife. Yet, Wordsworth's "Laodamia," and the ode of "Dion," and somesonnets, have a certain noble music; and Scott will sometimes draw astroke like the portrait of Lord Evandale given by Balfour of Burley.Thomas Carlyle, with his natural taste for what is manly and daring incharacter, has suffered no heroic trait in his favorites to drop fromhis biographical and historical pictures. Earlier, Robert Burns hasgiven us a song or two. In the Harleian Miscellanies there is an accountof the battle of Lutzen which deserves to be read. And Simon Ockley'sHistory of the Saracens recounts the prodigies of individual valor,with admiration all the more evident on the part of the narrator that heseems to think that his place in Christian Oxford requires of him someproper protestations of abhorrence. But if we explore the literatureof Heroism we shall quickly come to Plutarch, who is its Doctor andhistorian. To him we owe the Brasidas, the Dion, the Epaminondas, theScipio of old, and I must think we are more deeply indebted to him thanto all the ancient writers. Each of his "Lives" is a refutation to thedespondency and cowardice of our religious and political theorists. Awild courage, a Stoicism not of the schools but of the blood, shines inevery anecdote, and has given that book its immense fame.
We need books of this tart cathartic virtue more than books of politicalscience or of private economy. Life is a festival only to the wise.Seen from the nook and chimney-side of prudence, it wears a raggedand dangerous front. The violations of the laws of nature by ourpredecessors and our contemporaries are punished in us also. The diseaseand deformity around us certify the infraction of natural, intellectual,and moral laws, and often violation on violation to breed suchcompound misery. A lock-jaw that bends a man's head back to his heels;hydrophobia that makes him bark at his wife and babes; insanity thatmakes him eat grass; war, plague, cholera, famine, indicate a certainferocity in nature, which, as it had its inlet by human crime, must haveits outlet by human suffering. Unhappily no man exists who has not inhis own person become to some amount a stockholder in the sin, and somade himself liable to a share in the expiation.
Our culture therefore must not omit the arming of the man. Let himhear in season that he is born into the state of war, and that thecommonwealth and his own well-being require that he should not godancing in the weeds of peace, but warned, self-collected and neitherdefying nor dreading the thunder, let him take both reputation and lifein his hand, and, with perfect urbanity dare the gibbet and the mob bythe absolute truth of his speech and the rectitude of his behavior.
Towards all this external evil the man within the breast assumes awarlike attitude, and affirms his ability to cope single-handed with theinfinite army of enemies. To this military attitude of the soul we givethe name of Heroism. Its rudest form is the contempt for safety andease, which makes the attractiveness of war. It is a self-trust whichslights the restraints of prudence, in the plenitude of its energy andpower to repair the harms it may suffer. The hero is a mind of suchbalance that no disturbances can shake his will, but pleasantly and asit were merrily he advances to his own music, alike in frightful alarmsand in the tipsy mirth of universal dissoluteness. There is somewhat notphilosophical in heroism; there is somewhat not holy in it; it seems notto know that other souls are of one texture with it; it has pride; it isthe extreme of individual nature. Nevertheless we must profoundly revereit. There is somewhat in great actions which does not allow us to gobehind them. Heroism feels and never reasons, and therefore is alwaysright; and although a different breeding, different religion andgreater intellectual activity would have modified or even reversed theparticular action, yet for the hero that thing he does is the highestdeed, and is not open to the censure of philosophers or divines. It isthe avowal of the unschooled man that he finds a quality in him thatis negligent of expense, of health, of life, of danger, of hatred, ofreproach, and knows that his will is higher and more excellent than allactual and all possible antagonists.
Heroism works in contradiction to the voice of mankind and incontradiction, for a time, to the voice of the great and good. Heroismis an obedience to a secret impulse of an individual's character. Now tono other man can its wisdom appear as it does to him, for every man mustbe supposed to see a little farther on his own proper path than any oneelse. Therefore just and wise men take umbrage at his act, until aftersome little time be past: then they see it to be in unison with theiracts. All prudent men see that the action is clean contrary to a sensualprosperity; for every heroic act measures itself by its contempt ofsome external good. But it finds its own success at last, and then theprudent also extol.
Self-trust is the essence of heroism. It is the state of the soul atwar, and its ultimate objects are the last defiance of falsehood andwrong, and the power to bear all that can be inflicted by evil agents.It speaks the truth and it is just, generous, hospitable, temperate,scornful of petty calculations and scornful of being scorned. Itpersists; it is of an undaunted boldness and of a fortitude not tobe wearied out. Its jest is the littleness of common life. That falseprudence which dotes on health and wealth is the butt and merriment ofheroism. Heroism, like Plotinus, is almost ashamed of its body. Whatshall it say then to the sugar-plums and cats'-cradles, to the toilet,compliments, quarrels, cards and custard, which rack the wit of allsociety? What joys has kind nature provided for us dear creatures! Thereseems to be no interval between greatness and meanness. When the spiritis not master of the world, then it is its dupe. Yet the littleman takes the great hoax so innocently, works in it so headlong andbelieving, is born red, and dies gray, arranging his toilet, attendingon his own health, laying traps for sweet food and strong wine, settinghis heart on a horse or a rifle, made happy with a little gossip ora little praise, that the great soul cannot choose but laugh at suchearnest nonsense. "Indeed, these humble considerations make me out oflove with greatness. What a disgrace is it to me to take note how manypairs of silk stockings thou hast, namely, these and those that were thepeach-colored ones; or to bear the inventory of thy shirts, as one forsuperfluity, and one other for use!"
Citizens, thinking after the laws of arithmetic, consider theinconvenience of receiving strangers at their fireside, reckon narrowlythe loss of time and the unusual display; the soul of a better qualitythrusts back the unseasonable economy into the vaults of life, and says,I will obey the God, and the sacrifice and the fire he will provide.Ibn Hankal, the Arabian geographer, describes a heroic extreme in thehospitality of Sogd, in Bukharia. "When I was in Sogd I saw a greatbuilding, like a palace, the gates of which were open and fixed backto the wall with large nails. I asked the reason, and was told that thehouse had not been shut, night or day, for a hundred years. Strangersmay present themselves at any hour and in whatever number; the masterhas amply provided for the reception of the men and their animals, andis never happier than when they tarry for some time. Nothing of the kindhave I seen in any other country." The magnanimous know very well thatthey who give time, or money, or shelter, to the stranger,--so it bedone for love and not for ostentation,--do, as it were, put God underobligation to them, so perfect are the compensations of the universe. Insome way the time they seem to lose is redeemed and the pains they seemto take remunerate themselves. These men fan the flame of human love andraise the standard of civil virtue among mankind. But hospitality mustbe for service and not for show, or it pulls down the host. The bravesoul rates itself too high to value itself by the splendor of its tableand draperies. It gives what it hath, and all it hath, but its ownmajesty can lend a better grace to bannocks and fair water than belongto city feasts.
The temperance of the hero proceeds from the same wish to do no dishonorto the worthiness he has. But he loves it for its elegancy, not for itsausterity. It seems not worth his while to be solemn and denounce withbitterness flesh-eating or wine-drinking, the use of tobacco, or opium,or tea, or silk, or gold. A great man scarcely knows how he dines, howhe dresses; but without railing or precision his living is naturaland poetic. John Eliot, the Indian Apostle, drank water, and said ofwine,--"It is a noble, generous liquor and we should be humbly thankfulfor it, but, as I remember, water was made before it." Better still isthe temperance of King David, who poured out on the ground unto the Lordthe water which three of his warriors had brought him to drink, at theperil of their lives.
It is told of Brutus, that when he fell on his sword after the battleof Philippi, he quoted a line of Euripides,--"O Virtue! I have followedthee through life, and I find thee at last but a shade." I doubt notthe hero is slandered by this report. The heroic soul does not sell itsjustice and its nobleness. It does not ask to dine nicely and to sleepwarm. The essence of greatness is the perception that virtue is enough.Poverty is its ornament. It does not need plenty, and can very wellabide its loss.
But that which takes my fancy most in the heroic class, is thegood-humor and hilarity they exhibit. It is a height to which commonduty can very well attain, to suffer and to dare with solemnity. Butthese rare souls set opinion, success, and life at so cheap a rate thatthey will not soothe their enemies by petitions, or the show of sorrow,but wear their own habitual greatness. Scipio, charged with peculation,refuses to do himself so great a disgrace as to wait for justification,though he had the scroll of his accounts in his hands, but tears it topieces before the tribunes. Socrates's condemnation of himself to bemaintained in all honor in the Prytaneum, during his life, and SirThomas More's playfulness at the scaffold, are of the same strain. InBeaumont and Fletcher's "Sea Voyage," Juletta tells the stout captainand his company,--
     Jul. Why, slaves, 'tis in our power to hang ye.     Master. Very likely,     'Tis in our powers, then, to be hanged, and scorn ye.
These replies are sound and whole. Sport is the bloom and glow ofa perfect health. The great will not condescend to take any thingseriously; all must be as gay as the song of a canary, though it werethe building of cities or the eradication of old and foolish churchesand nations which have cumbered the earth long thousands of years.Simple hearts put all the history and customs of this world behind them,and play their own game in innocent defiance of the Blue-Laws of theworld; and such would appear, could we see the human race assembled invision, like little children frolicking together, though to the eyesof mankind at large they wear a stately and solemn garb of works andinfluences.
The interest these fine stories have for us, the power of a romance overthe boy who grasps the forbidden book under his bench at school, ourdelight in the hero, is the main fact to our purpose. All these greatand transcendent properties are ours. If we dilate in beholding theGreek energy, the Roman pride, it is that we are already domesticatingthe same sentiment. Let us find room for this great guest in our smallhouses. The first step of worthiness will be to disabuse us of oursuperstitious associations with places and times, with number and size.Why should these words, Athenian, Roman, Asia and England, so tingle inthe ear? Where the heart is, there the muses, there the gods sojourn,and not in any geography of fame. Massachusetts, Connecticut River andBoston Bay you think paltry places, and the ear loves names of foreignand classic topography. But here we are; and, if we will tarry a little,we may come to learn that here is best. See to it only that thyself ishere, and art and nature, hope and fate, friends, angels and theSupreme Being shall not be absent from the chamber where thou sittest.Epaminondas, brave and affectionate, does not seem to us to need Olympusto die upon, nor the Syrian sunshine. He lies very well where he is. TheJerseys were handsome ground enough for Washington to tread, and Londonstreets for the feet of Milton. A great man makes his climate genial inthe imagination of men, and its air the beloved element of all delicatespirits. That country is the fairest which is inhabited by the noblestminds. The pictures which fill the imagination in reading the actionsof Pericles, Xenophon, Columbus, Bayard, Sidney, Hampden, teach us howneedlessly mean our life is; that we, by the depth of our living, shoulddeck it with more than regal or national splendor, and act on principlesthat should interest man and nature in the length of our days.
We have seen or heard of many extraordinary young men who never ripened,or whose performance in actual life was not extraordinary. When we seetheir air and mien, when we hear them speak of society, of books, ofreligion, we admire their superiority; they seem to throw contempt onour entire polity and social state; theirs is the tone of a youthfulgiant who is sent to work revolutions. But they enter an activeprofession and the forming Colossus shrinks to the common size of man.The magic they used was the ideal tendencies, which always make theActual ridiculous; but the tough world had its revenge the moment theyput their horses of the sun to plough in its furrow. They found noexample and no companion, and their heart fainted. What then? The lessonthey gave in their first aspirations is yet true; and a better valor anda purer truth shall one day organize their belief. Or why should a womanliken herself to any historical woman, and think, because Sappho, orSevigne, or De Stael, or the cloistered souls who have had genius andcultivation do not satisfy the imagination and the serene Themis, nonecan,--certainly not she? Why not? She has a new and unattempted problemto solve, perchance that of the happiest nature that ever bloomed. Letthe maiden, with erect soul, walk serenely on her way, accept the hintof each new experience, search in turn all the objects that solicit hereye, that she may learn the power and the charm of her new-born being,which is the kindling of a new dawn in the recesses of space. Thefair girl who repels interference by a decided and proud choice ofinfluences, so careless of pleasing, so wilful and lofty, inspires everybeholder with somewhat of her own nobleness. The silent heart encouragesher; O friend, never strike sail to a fear! Come into port greatly, orsail with God the seas. Not in vain you live, for every passing eye ischeered and refined by the vision.
The characteristic of heroism is its persistency. All men have wanderingimpulses, fits and starts of generosity. But when you have chosen yourpart, abide by it, and do not weakly try to reconcile yourself with theworld. The heroic cannot be the common, nor the common the heroic. Yetwe have the weakness to expect the sympathy of people in those actionswhose excellence is that they outrun sympathy and appeal to a tardyjustice. If you would serve your brother, because it is fit for you toserve him, do not take back your words when you find that prudent peopledo not commend you. Adhere to your own act, and congratulate yourself ifyou have done something strange and extravagant and broken the monotonyof a decorous age. It was a high counsel that I once heard given to ayoung person,--"Always do what you are afraid to do." A simple manlycharacter need never make an apology, but should regard its past actionwith the calmness of Phocion, when he admitted that the event of thebattle was happy, yet did not regret his dissuasion from the battle.
There is no weakness or exposure for which we cannot find consolation inthe thought--this is a part of my constitution, part of my relationand office to my fellow-creature. Has nature covenanted with me that Ishould never appear to disadvantage, never make a ridiculous figure? Letus be generous of our dignity as well as of our money. Greatness onceand for ever has done with opinion. We tell our charities, not becausewe wish to be praised for them, not because we think they have greatmerit, but for our justification. It is a capital blunder; as youdiscover when another man recites his charities.
To speak the truth, even with some austerity, to live with some rigorof temperance, or some extremes of generosity, seems to be an asceticismwhich common good-nature would appoint to those who are at ease and inplenty, in sign that they feel a brotherhood with the great multitudeof suffering men. And not only need we breathe and exercise the soulby assuming the penalties of abstinence, of debt, of solitude, ofunpopularity,--but it behooves the wise man to look with a bold eyeinto those rarer dangers which sometimes invade men, and to familiarizehimself with disgusting forms of disease, with sounds of execration, andthe vision of violent death.
Times of heroism are generally times of terror, but the day never shinesin which this element may not work. The circumstances of man, we say,are historically somewhat better in this country and at this hour thanperhaps ever before. More freedom exists for culture. It will not nowrun against an axe at the first step out of the beaten track of opinion.But whoso is heroic will always find crises to try his edge. Humanvirtue demands her champions and martyrs, and the trial of persecutionalways proceeds. It is but the other day that the brave Lovejoy gavehis breast to the bullets of a mob, for the rights of free speech andopinion, and died when it was better not to live.
I see not any road of perfect peace which a man can walk, but after thecounsel of his own bosom. Let him quit too much association, let himgo home much, and stablish himself in those courses he approves. Theunremitting retention of simple and high sentiments in obscure dutiesis hardening the character to that temper which will work with honor,if need be in the tumult, or on the scaffold. Whatever outrages havehappened to men may befall a man again; and very easily in a republic,if there appear any signs of a decay of religion. Coarse slander, fire,tar and feathers and the gibbet, the youth may freely bring home to hismind and with what sweetness of temper he can, and inquire how fasthe can fix his sense of duty, braving such penalties, whenever it mayplease the next newspaper and a sufficient number of his neighbors topronounce his opinions incendiary.
It may calm the apprehension of calamity in the most susceptible heartto see how quick a bound Nature has set to the utmost infliction ofmalice. We rapidly approach a brink over which no enemy can follow us:--
          "Let them rave:     Thou art quiet in thy grave."
In the gloom of our ignorance of what shall be, in the hour when we aredeaf to the higher voices, who does not envy those who have seen safelyto an end their manful endeavor? Who that sees the meanness of ourpolitics but inly congratulates Washington that he is long alreadywrapped in his shroud, and for ever safe; that he was laid sweet inhis grave, the hope of humanity not yet subjugated in him? Who does notsometimes envy the good and brave who are no more to suffer from thetumults of the natural world, and await with curious complacency thespeedy term of his own conversation with finite nature? And yet the lovethat will be annihilated sooner than treacherous has already made deathimpossible, and affirms itself no mortal but a native of the deeps ofabsolute and inextinguishable being.
*****


     THE OVER-SOUL.
     "BUT souls that of his own good life partake,     He loves as his own self; dear as his eye     They are to Him: He'll never them forsake:     When they shall die, then God himself shall die:     They live, they live in blest eternity."                                        Henry More.
     Space is ample, east and west,     But two cannot go abreast,     Cannot travel in it two:     Yonder masterful cuckoo     Crowds every egg out of the nest,     Quick or dead, except its own;     A spell is laid on sod and stone,     Night and Day 've been tampered with,     Every quality and pith     Surcharged and sultry with a power     That works its will on age and hour.



IX. THE OVER-SOUL.
THERE is a difference between one and another hour of life in theirauthority and subsequent effect. Our faith comes in moments; our vice ishabitual. Yet there is a depth in those brief moments which constrainsus to ascribe more reality to them than to all other experiences. Forthis reason the argument which is always forthcoming to silencethose who conceive extraordinary hopes of man, namely the appeal toexperience, is for ever invalid and vain. We give up the past to theobjector, and yet we hope. He must explain this hope. We grant thathuman life is mean, but how did we find out that it was mean? What isthe ground of this uneasiness of ours; of this old discontent? Whatis the universal sense of want and ignorance, but the fine innuendoby which the soul makes its enormous claim? Why do men feel that thenatural history of man has never been written, but he is always leavingbehind what you have said of him, and it becomes old, and books ofmetaphysics worthless? The philosophy of six thousand years has notsearched the chambers and magazines of the soul. In its experimentsthere has always remained, in the last analysis, a residuum it could notresolve. Man is a stream whose source is hidden. Our being is descendinginto us from we know not whence. The most exact calculator has noprescience that somewhat incalculable may not balk the very next moment.I am constrained every moment to acknowledge a higher origin for eventsthan the will I call mine.
As with events, so is it with thoughts. When I watch that flowing river,which, out of regions I see not, pours for a season its streams into me,I see that I am a pensioner; not a cause, but a surprised spectator ofthis ethereal water; that I desire and look up and put myself in theattitude of reception, but from some alien energy the visions come.
The Supreme Critic on the errors of the past and the present, and theonly prophet of that which must be, is that great nature in which werest as the earth lies in the soft arms of the atmosphere; that Unity,that Over-soul, within which every man's particular being is containedand made one with all other; that common heart of which all sincereconversation is the worship, to which all right action is submission;that overpowering reality which confutes our tricks and talents, andconstrains every one to pass for what he is, and to speak from hischaracter and not from his tongue, and which evermore tends to pass intoour thought and hand and become wisdom and virtue and power and beauty.We live in succession, in division, in parts, in particles. Meantimewithin man is the soul of the whole; the wise silence; the universalbeauty, to which every part and particle is equally related; the eternalONE. And this deep power in which we exist and whose beatitude is allaccessible to us, is not only self-sufficing and perfect in every hour,but the act of seeing and the thing seen, the seer and the spectacle,the subject and the object, are one. We see the world piece by piece, asthe sun, the moon, the animal, the tree; but the whole, of which theseare the shining parts, is the soul. Only by the vision of that Wisdomcan the horoscope of the ages be read, and by falling back on our betterthoughts, by yielding to the spirit of prophecy which is innate in everyman, we can know what it saith. Every man's words who speaks from thatlife must sound vain to those who do not dwell in the same thoughton their own part. I dare not speak for it. My words do not carry itsaugust sense; they fall short and cold. Only itself can inspire whomit will, and behold! their speech shall be lyrical, and sweet, anduniversal as the rising of the wind. Yet I desire, even by profanewords, if I may not use sacred, to indicate the heaven of this deity andto report what hints I have collected of the transcendent simplicity andenergy of the Highest Law.
If we consider what happens in conversation, in reveries, in remorse, intimes of passion, in surprises, in the instructions of dreams, whereinoften we see ourselves in masquerade,--the droll disguises onlymagnifying and enhancing a real element and forcing it on our distinctnotice,--we shall catch many hints that will broaden and lighten intoknowledge of the secret of nature. All goes to show that the soul inman is not an organ, but animates and exercises all the organs; is nota function, like the power of memory, of calculation, of comparison, butuses these as hands and feet; is not a faculty, but a light; is not theintellect or the will, but the master of the intellect and the will;is the background of our being, in which they lie,--an immensity notpossessed and that cannot be possessed. From within or from behind,a light shines through us upon things and makes us aware that we arenothing, but the light is all. A man is the facade of a temple whereinall wisdom and all good abide. What we commonly call man, the eating,drinking, planting, counting man, does not, as we know him, representhimself, but misrepresents himself. Him we do not respect, but the soul,whose organ he is, would he let it appear through his action, would makeour knees bend. When it breathes through his intellect, it is genius;when it breathes through his will, it is virtue; when it flows throughhis affection, it is love. And the blindness of the intellect beginswhen it would be something of itself. The weakness of the will beginswhen the individual would be something of himself. All reform aims insome one particular to let the soul have its way through us; in otherwords, to engage us to obey.
Of this pure nature every man is at some time sensible. Languagecannot paint it with his colors. It is too subtile. It is undefinable,unmeasurable; but we know that it pervades and contains us. We know thatall spiritual being is in man. A wise old proverb says, "God comes tosee us without bell;" that is, as there is no screen or ceiling betweenour heads and the infinite heavens, so is there no bar or wall in thesoul where man, the effect, ceases, and God, the cause, begins. Thewalls are taken away. We lie open on one side to the deeps of spiritualnature, to the attributes of God. Justice we see and know, Love,Freedom, Power. These natures no man ever got above, but they tower overus, and most in the moment when our interests tempt us to wound them.
The sovereignty of this nature whereof we speak is made known by itsindependency of those limitations which circumscribe us on every hand.The soul circumscribes all things. As I have said, it contradicts allexperience. In like manner it abolishes time and space. The influence ofthe senses has in most men overpowered the mind to that degree that thewalls of time and space have come to look real and insurmountable;and to speak with levity of these limits is, in the world, the sign ofinsanity. Yet time and space are but inverse measures of the force ofthe soul. The spirit sports with time,--
          "Can crowd eternity into an hour,           Or stretch an hour to eternity."
We are often made to feel that there is another youth and age than thatwhich is measured from the year of our natural birth. Some thoughtsalways find us young, and keep us so. Such a thought is the love of theuniversal and eternal beauty. Every man parts from that contemplationwith the feeling that it rather belongs to ages than to mortal life. Theleast activity of the intellectual powers redeems us in a degree fromthe conditions of time. In sickness, in languor, give us a strain ofpoetry or a profound sentence, and we are refreshed; or produce a volumeof Plato or Shakspeare, or remind us of their names, and instantlywe come into a feeling of longevity. See how the deep divine thoughtreduces centuries and millenniums and makes itself present through allages. Is the teaching of Christ less effective now than it was whenfirst his mouth was opened? The emphasis of facts and persons in mythought has nothing to do with time. And so always the soul's scale isone, the scale of the senses and the understanding is another. Beforethe revelations of the soul, Time, Space and Nature shrink away. Incommon speech we refer all things to time, as we habitually refer theimmensely sundered stars to one concave sphere. And so we say that theJudgment is distant or near, that the Millennium approaches, that a dayof certain political, moral, social reforms is at hand, and thelike, when we mean that in the nature of things one of the facts wecontemplate is external and fugitive, and the other is permanent andconnate with the soul. The things we now esteem fixed shall, one by one,detach themselves like ripe fruit from our experience, and fall. Thewind shall blow them none knows whither. The landscape, the figures,Boston, London, are facts as fugitive as any institution past, or anywhiff of mist or smoke, and so is society, and so is the world. The soullooketh steadily forwards, creating a world before her, leaving worldsbehind her. She has no dates, nor rites, nor persons, nor specialtiesnor men. The soul knows only the soul; the web of events is the flowingrobe in which she is clothed.
After its own law and not by arithmetic is the rate of its progress tobe computed. The soul's advances are not made by gradation, such as canbe represented by motion in a straight line, but rather by ascension ofstate, such as can be represented by metamorphosis,--from the egg to theworm, from the worm to the fly. The growths of genius are of a certaintotal character, that does not advance the elect individual first overJohn, then Adam, then Richard, and give to each the pain of discoveredinferiority,--but by every throe of growth the man expands there wherehe works, passing, at each pulsation, classes, populations, of men. Witheach divine impulse the mind rends the thin rinds of the visible andfinite, and comes out into eternity, and inspires and expires its air.It converses with truths that have always been spoken in the world, andbecomes conscious of a closer sympathy with Zeno and Arrian than withpersons in the house.
This is the law of moral and of mental gain. The simple rise as byspecific levity not into a particular virtue, but into the region of allthe virtues. They are in the spirit which contains them all. The soulrequires purity, but purity is not it; requires justice, but justice isnot that; requires beneficence, but is somewhat better; so that there isa kind of descent and accommodation felt when we leave speaking of moralnature to urge a virtue which it enjoins. To the well-born child all thevirtues are natural, and not painfully acquired. Speak to his heart, andthe man becomes suddenly virtuous.
Within the same sentiment is the germ of intellectual growth, whichobeys the same law. Those who are capable of humility, of justice,of love, of aspiration, stand already on a platform that commands thesciences and arts, speech and poetry, action and grace. For whoso dwellsin this moral beatitude already anticipates those special powers whichmen prize so highly. The lover has no talent, no skill, which passes forquite nothing with his enamoured maiden, however little she may possessof related faculty; and the heart which abandons itself to the SupremeMind finds itself related to all its works, and will travel a royal roadto particular knowledges and powers. In ascending to this primaryand aboriginal sentiment we have come from our remote station on thecircumference instantaneously to the centre of the world, where, as inthe closet of God, we see causes, and anticipate the universe, which isbut a slow effect.
One mode of the divine teaching is the incarnation of the spirit in aform,--in forms, like my own. I live in society, with persons who answerto thoughts in my own mind, or express a certain obedience to the greatinstincts to which I live. I see its presence to them. I am certified ofa common nature; and these other souls, these separated selves, draw meas nothing else can. They stir in me the new emotions we call passion;of love, hatred, fear, admiration, pity; thence come conversation,competition, persuasion, cities and war. Persons are supplementaryto the primary teaching of the soul. In youth we are mad for persons.Childhood and youth see all the world in them. But the larger experienceof man discovers the identical nature appearing through them all.Persons themselves acquaint us with the impersonal. In all conversationbetween two persons tacit reference is made, as to a third party, to acommon nature. That third party or common nature is not social; itis impersonal; is God. And so in groups where debate is earnest, andespecially on high questions, the company become aware that the thoughtrises to an equal level in all bosoms, that all have a spiritualproperty in what was said, as well as the sayer. They all become wiserthan they were. It arches over them like a temple, this unity of thoughtin which every heart beats with nobler sense of power and duty, andthinks and acts with unusual solemnity. All are conscious of attainingto a higher self-possession. It shines for all. There is a certainwisdom of humanity which is common to the greatest men with the lowest,and which our ordinary education often labors to silence and obstruct.The mind is one, and the best minds, who love truth for its ownsake, think much less of property in truth. They accept it thankfullyeverywhere, and do not label or stamp it with any man's name, for it istheirs long beforehand, and from eternity. The learned and the studiousof thought have no monopoly of wisdom. Their violence of directionin some degree disqualifies them to think truly. We owe many valuableobservations to people who are not very acute or profound, and who saythe thing without effort which we want and have long been hunting invain. The action of the soul is oftener in that which is felt and leftunsaid than in that which is said in any conversation. It broods overevery society, and they unconsciously seek for it in each other. We knowbetter than we do. We do not yet possess ourselves, and we know at thesame time that we are much more. I feel the same truth how often in mytrivial conversation with my neighbors, that somewhat higher in each ofus overlooks this by-play, and Jove nods to Jove from behind each of us.
Men descend to meet. In their habitual and mean service to the world,for which they forsake their native nobleness, they resemble thoseArabian sheiks who dwell in mean houses and affect an external poverty,to escape the rapacity of the Pacha, and reserve all their display ofwealth for their interior and guarded retirements.
As it is present in all persons, so it is in every period of life. It isadult already in the infant man. In my dealing with my child, my Latinand Greek, my accomplishments and my money stead me nothing; but as muchsoul as I have avails. If I am wilful, he sets his will against mine,one for one, and leaves me, if I please, the degradation of beating himby my superiority of strength. But if I renounce my will and act for thesoul, setting that up as umpire between us two, out of his young eyeslooks the same soul; he reveres and loves with me.
The soul is the perceiver and revealer of truth. We know truth when wesee it, let skeptic and scoffer say what they choose. Foolish peopleask you, when you have spoken what they do not wish to hear, 'How do youknow it is truth, and not an error of your own?' We know truth when wesee it, from opinion, as we know when we are awake that we are awake. Itwas a grand sentence of Emanuel Swedenborg, which would alone indicatethe greatness of that man's perception,--"It is no proof of a man'sunderstanding to be able to confirm whatever he pleases; but to beable to discern that what is true is true, and that what is false isfalse,--this is the mark and character of intelligence." In the book Iread, the good thought returns to me, as every truth will, the imageof the whole soul. To the bad thought which I find in it, the same soulbecomes a discerning, separating sword, and lops it away. We are wiserthan we know. If we will not interfere with our thought, but will actentirely, or see how the thing stands in God, we know the particularthing, and every thing, and every man. For the Maker of all things andall persons stands behind us and casts his dread omniscience through usover things.
But beyond this recognition of its own in particular passages of theindividual's experience, it also reveals truth. And here we shouldseek to reinforce ourselves by its very presence, and to speak with aworthier, loftier strain of that advent. For the soul's communicationof truth is the highest event in nature, since it then does not givesomewhat from itself, but it gives itself, or passes into and becomesthat man whom it enlightens; or, in proportion to that truth hereceives, it takes him to itself.
We distinguish the announcements of the soul, its manifestations of itsown nature, by the term Revelation. These are always attended by theemotion of the sublime. For this communication is an influx of theDivine mind into our mind. It is an ebb of the individual rivulet beforethe flowing surges of the sea of life. Every distinct apprehension ofthis central commandment agitates men with awe and delight. A thrillpasses through all men at the reception of new truth, or at theperformance of a great action, which comes out of the heart of nature.In these communications the power to see is not separated from thewill to do, but the insight proceeds from obedience, and the obedienceproceeds from a joyful perception. Every moment when the individualfeels himself invaded by it is memorable. By the necessity of ourconstitution a certain enthusiasm attends the individual's consciousnessof that divine presence. The character and duration of this enthusiasmvaries with the state of the individual, from an ecstasy and trance andprophetic inspiration,--which is its rarer appearance,--to the faintestglow of virtuous emotion, in which form it warms, like our householdfires, all the families and associations of men, and makes societypossible. A certain tendency to insanity has always attended the openingof the religious sense in men, as if they had been "blasted with excessof light." The trances of Socrates, the "union" of Plotinus, thevision of Porphyry, the conversion of Paul, the aurora of Behmen,the convulsions of George Fox and his Quakers, the illumination ofSwedenborg, are of this kind. What was in the case of these remarkablepersons a ravishment, has, in innumerable instances in common life, beenexhibited in less striking manner. Everywhere the history of religionbetrays a tendency to enthusiasm. The rapture of the Moravian andQuietist; the opening of the internal sense of the Word, in the languageof the New Jerusalem Church; the revival of the Calvinistic churches;the experiences of the Methodists, are varying forms of that shudder ofawe and delight with which the individual soul always mingles with theuniversal soul.
The nature of these revelations is the same; they are perceptions of theabsolute law. They are solutions of the soul's own questions. They donot answer the questions which the understanding asks. The soul answersnever by words, but by the thing itself that is inquired after.
Revelation is the disclosure of the soul. The popular notion of arevelation is that it is a telling of fortunes. In past oracles of thesoul the understanding seeks to find answers to sensual questions, andundertakes to tell from God how long men shall exist, what their handsshall do and who shall be their company, adding names and dates andplaces. But we must pick no locks. We must check this low curiosity. Ananswer in words is delusive; it is really no answer to the questionsyou ask. Do not require a description of the countries towards which yousail. The description does not describe them to you, and to-morrow youarrive there and know them by inhabiting them. Men ask concerning theimmortality of the soul, the employments of heaven, the state of thesinner, and so forth. They even dream that Jesus has left replies toprecisely these interrogatories. Never a moment did that sublime spiritspeak in their patois. To truth, justice, love, the attributes of thesoul, the idea of immutableness is essentially associated. Jesus, livingin these moral sentiments, heedless of sensual fortunes, heeding onlythe manifestations of these, never made the separation of the idea ofduration from the essence of these attributes, nor uttered a syllableconcerning the duration of the soul. It was left to his disciples tosever duration from the moral elements, and to teach the immortalityof the soul as a doctrine, and maintain it by evidences. The moment thedoctrine of the immortality is separately taught, man is already fallen.In the flowing of love, in the adoration of humility, there is noquestion of continuance. No inspired man ever asks this question orcondescends to these evidences. For the soul is true to itself, and theman in whom it is shed abroad cannot wander from the present, which isinfinite, to a future which would be finite.
These questions which we lust to ask about the future are a confessionof sin. God has no answer for them. No answer in words can reply to aquestion of things. It is not in an arbitrary "decree of God," but inthe nature of man, that a veil shuts down on the facts of to-morrow; forthe soul will not have us read any other cipher than that of cause andeffect. By this veil which curtains events it instructs the childrenof men to live in to-day. The only mode of obtaining an answer to thesequestions of the senses is to forego all low curiosity, and, acceptingthe tide of being which floats us into the secret of nature, work andlive, work and live, and all unawares the advancing soul has built andforged for itself a new condition, and the question and the answer areone.
By the same fire, vital, consecrating, celestial, which burns untilit shall dissolve all things into the waves and surges of an ocean oflight, we see and know each other, and what spirit each is of. Whocan tell the grounds of his knowledge of the character of the severalindividuals in his circle of friends? No man. Yet their acts and wordsdo not disappoint him. In that man, though he knew no ill of him, he putno trust. In that other, though they had seldom met, authentic signshad yet passed, to signify that he might be trusted as one who had aninterest in his own character. We know each other very well,--which ofus has been just to himself and whether that which we teach or behold isonly an aspiration or is our honest effort also.
We are all discerners of spirits. That diagnosis lies aloft in ourlife or unconscious power. The intercourse of society, its trade,its religion, its friendships, its quarrels, is one wide, judicialinvestigation of character. In full court, or in small committee, orconfronted face to face, accuser and accused, men offer themselves to bejudged. Against their will they exhibit those decisive trifles by whichcharacter is read. But who judges? and what? Not our understanding. Wedo not read them by learning or craft. No; the wisdom of the wiseman consists herein, that he does not judge them; he lets them judgethemselves and merely reads and records their own verdict.
By virtue of this inevitable nature, private will is overpowered, and,maugre our efforts or our imperfections, your genius will speakfrom you, and mine from me. That which we are, we shall teach, notvoluntarily but involuntarily. Thoughts come into our minds by avenueswhich we never left open, and thoughts go out of our minds throughavenues which we never voluntarily opened. Character teaches over ourhead. The infallible index of true progress is found in the tone the mantakes. Neither his age, nor his breeding, nor company, nor books,nor actions, nor talents, nor all together can hinder him from beingdeferential to a higher spirit than his own. If he have not foundhis home in God, his manners, his forms of speech, the turn ofhis sentences, the build, shall I say, of all his opinions willinvoluntarily confess it, let him brave it out how he will. If he havefound his centre, the Deity will shine through him, through allthe disguises of ignorance, of ungenial temperament, of unfavorablecircumstance. The tone of seeking is one, and the tone of having isanother.
The great distinction between teachers sacred or literary,--betweenpoets like Herbert, and poets like Pope,--between philosophers likeSpinoza, Kant and Coleridge, and philosophers like Locke, Paley,Mackintosh and Stewart,--between men of the world who are reckonedaccomplished talkers, and here and there a fervent mystic, prophesyinghalf insane under the infinitude of his thought,--is that one classspeak from within, or from experience, as parties and possessors of thefact; and the other class from without, as spectators merely, or perhapsas acquainted with the fact on the evidence of third persons. It is ofno use to preach to me from without. I can do that too easily myself.Jesus speaks always from within, and in a degree that transcends allothers. In that is the miracle. I believe beforehand that it ought soto be. All men stand continually in the expectation of the appearanceof such a teacher. But if a man do not speak from within the veil, wherethe word is one with that it tells of, let him lowly confess it.
The same Omniscience flows into the intellect, and makes what we callgenius. Much of the wisdom of the world is not wisdom, and the mostilluminated class of men are no doubt superior to literary fame, andare not writers. Among the multitude of scholars and authors, we feel nohallowing presence; we are sensible of a knack and skill rather than ofinspiration; they have a light and know not whence it comes and callit their own; their talent is some exaggerated faculty, some overgrownmember, so that their strength is a disease. In these instances theintellectual gifts do not make the impression of virtue, but almostof vice; and we feel that a man's talents stand in the way of hisadvancement in truth. But genius is religious. It is a larger imbibingof the common heart. It is not anomalous, but more like and not lesslike other men. There is in all great poets a wisdom of humanity whichis superior to any talents they exercise. The author, the wit, thepartisan, the fine gentleman, does not take place of the man. Humanityshines in Homer, in Chaucer, in Spenser, in Shakspeare, in Milton. Theyare content with truth. They use the positive degree. They seem frigidand phlegmatic to those who have been spiced with the frantic passionand violent coloring of inferior but popular writers. For they are poetsby the free course which they allow to the informing soul, which throughtheir eyes beholds again and blesses the things which it hath made.The soul is superior to its knowledge, wiser than any of its works. Thegreat poet makes us feel our own wealth, and then we think less ofhis compositions. His best communication to our mind is to teach us todespise all he has done. Shakspeare carries us to such a lofty strain ofintelligent activity as to suggest a wealth which beggars his own; andwe then feel that the splendid works which he has created, and which inother hours we extol as a sort of self-existent poetry, take no strongerhold of real nature than the shadow of a passing traveller on the rock.The inspiration which uttered itself in Hamlet and Lear could utterthings as good from day to day for ever. Why then should I make accountof Hamlet and Lear, as if we had not the soul from which they fell assyllables from the tongue?
This energy does not descend into individual life on any other conditionthan entire possession. It comes to the lowly and simple; it comes towhomsoever will put off what is foreign and proud; it comes as insight;it comes as serenity and grandeur. When we see those whom it inhabits,we are apprised of new degrees of greatness. From that inspiration theman comes back with a changed tone. He does not talk with men with aneye to their opinion. He tries them. It requires of us to be plain andtrue. The vain traveller attempts to embellish his life by quoting mylord and the prince and the countess, who thus said or did to him.The ambitious vulgar show you their spoons and brooches and rings, andpreserve their cards and compliments. The more cultivated, in theiraccount of their own experience, cull out the pleasing, poeticcircumstance,--the visit to Rome, the man of genius they saw, thebrilliant friend They know; still further on perhaps the gorgeouslandscape, the mountain lights, the mountain thoughts they enjoyedyesterday,--and so seek to throw a romantic color over their life. Butthe soul that ascends to worship the great God is plain and true; has norose-color, no fine friends, no chivalry, no adventures; does not wantadmiration; dwells in the hour that now is, in the earnest experienceof the common day,--by reason of the present moment and the mere triflehaving become porous to thought and bibulous of the sea of light.
Converse with a mind that is grandly simple, and literature looks likeword-catching. The simplest utterances are worthiest to be written, yetare they so cheap and so things of course, that in the infinite richesof the soul it is like gathering a few pebbles off the ground, orbottling a little air in a phial, when the whole earth and the wholeatmosphere are ours. Nothing can pass there, or make you one of thecircle, but the casting aside your trappings, and dealing man to man innaked truth, plain confession, and omniscient affirmation.
Souls such as these treat you as gods would, walk as gods in the earth,accepting without any admiration your wit, your bounty, your virtueeven,--say rather your act of duty, for your virtue they own as theirproper blood, royal as themselves, and over-royal, and the father of thegods. But what rebuke their plain fraternal bearing casts on the mutualflattery with which authors solace each other and wound themselves!These flatter not. I do not wonder that these men go to see Cromwell andChristina and Charles the Second and James the First and the Grand Turk.For they are, in their own elevation, the fellows of kings, and mustfeel the servile tone of conversation in the world. They must always bea godsend to princes, for they confront them, a king to a king, withoutducking or concession, and give a high nature the refreshment andsatisfaction of resistance, of plain humanity, of even companionship andof new ideas. They leave them wiser and superior men. Souls like thesemake us feel that sincerity is more excellent than flattery. Deal soplainly with man and woman as to constrain the utmost sincerity anddestroy all hope of trifling with you. It is the highest compliment youcan pay. Their "highest praising," said Milton, "is not flattery, andtheir plainest advice is a kind of praising."
Ineffable is the union of man and God in every act of the soul. Thesimplest person who in his integrity worships God, becomes God; yet forever and ever the influx of this better and universal self is new andunsearchable. It inspires awe and astonishment. How dear, how soothingto man, arises the idea of God, peopling the lonely place, effacing thescars of our mistakes and disappointments! When we have broken our godof tradition and ceased from our god of rhetoric, then may God fire theheart with his presence. It is the doubling of the heart itself, nay,the infinite enlargement of the heart with a power of growth to a newinfinity on every side. It inspires in man an infallible trust. He hasnot the conviction, but the sight, that the best is the true, and may inthat thought easily dismiss all particular uncertainties and fears,and adjourn to the sure revelation of time the solution of his privateriddles. He is sure that his welfare is dear to the heart of being.In the presence of law to his mind he is overflowed with a reliance souniversal that it sweeps away all cherished hopes and the most stableprojects of mortal condition in its flood. He believes that he cannotescape from his good. The things that are really for thee gravitate tothee. You are running to seek your friend. Let your feet run, but yourmind need not. If you do not find him, will you not acquiesce that it isbest you should not find him? for there is a power, which, as it is inyou, is in him also, and could therefore very well bring you together,if it were for the best. You are preparing with eagerness to go andrender a service to which your talent and your taste invite you, thelove of men and the hope of fame. Has it not occurred to you that youhave no right to go, unless you are equally willing to be prevented fromgoing? O, believe, as thou livest, that every sound that is spoken overthe round world, which thou oughtest to hear, will vibrate on thine ear!Every proverb, every book, every byword that belongs to thee for aid orcomfort, shall surely come home through open or winding passages. Everyfriend whom not thy fantastic will but the great and tender heart inthee craveth, shall lock thee in his embrace. And this because theheart in thee is the heart of all; not a valve, not a wall, notan intersection is there anywhere in nature, but one blood rollsuninterruptedly an endless circulation through all men, as the water ofthe globe is all one sea, and, truly seen, its tide is one.
Let man then learn the revelation of all nature and all thought to hisheart; this, namely; that the Highest dwells with him; that the sourcesof nature are in his own mind, if the sentiment of duty is there. But ifhe would know what the great God speaketh, he must 'go into his closetand shut the door,' as Jesus said. God will not make himself manifest tocowards. He must greatly listen to himself, withdrawing himself from allthe accents of other men's devotion. Even their prayers are hurtful tohim, until he have made his own. Our religion vulgarly stands onnumbers of believers. Whenever the appeal is made,--no matter howindirectly,--to numbers, proclamation is then and there made thatreligion is not. He that finds God a sweet enveloping thought to himnever counts his company. When I sit in that presence, who shall dareto come in? When I rest in perfect humility, when I burn with pure love,what can Calvin or Swedenborg say?
It makes no difference whether the appeal is to numbers or to one. Thefaith that stands on authority is not faith. The reliance on authoritymeasures the decline of religion, the withdrawal of the soul. Theposition men have given to Jesus, now for many centuries of history, isa position of authority. It characterizes themselves. It cannot alterthe eternal facts. Great is the soul, and plain. It is no flatterer,it is no follower; it never appeals from itself. It believes in itself.Before the immense possibilities of man all mere experience, all pastbiography, however spotless and sainted, shrinks away. Before thatheaven which our presentiments foreshow us, we cannot easily praise anyform of life we have seen or read of. We not only affirm that we havefew great men, but, absolutely speaking, that we have none; that we haveno history, no record of any character or mode of living that entirelycontents us. The saints and demigods whom history worships we areconstrained to accept with a grain of allowance. Though in our lonelyhours we draw a new strength out of their memory, yet, pressed on ourattention, as they are by the thoughtless and customary, they fatigueand invade. The soul gives itself, alone, original and pure, to theLonely, Original and Pure, who, on that condition, gladly inhabits,leads and speaks through it. Then is it glad, young and nimble. It isnot wise, but it sees through all things. It is not called religious,but it is innocent. It calls the light its own, and feels that the grassgrows and the stone falls by a law inferior to, and dependent on, itsnature. Behold, it saith, I am born into the great, the universal mind.I, the imperfect, adore my own Perfect. I am somehow receptive of thegreat soul, and thereby I do Overlook the sun and the stars and feelthem to be the fair accidents and effects which change and pass. Moreand more the surges of everlasting nature enter into me, and I becomepublic and human in my regards and actions. So come I to live inthoughts and act with energies which are immortal. Thus revering thesoul, and learning, as the ancient said, that "its beauty is immense,"man will come to see that the world is the perennial miracle which thesoul worketh, and be less astonished at particular wonders; he willlearn that there is no profane history; that all history is sacred; thatthe universe is represented in an atom, in a moment of time. He willweave no longer a spotted life of shreds and patches, but he will livewith a divine unity. He will cease from what is base and frivolous inhis life and be content with all places and with any service he canrender. He will calmly front the morrow in the negligency of that trustwhich carries God with it and so hath already the whole future in thebottom of the heart.

*****


     CIRCLES.
     NATURE centres into balls,     And her proud ephemerals,     Fast to surface and outside,     Scan the profile of the sphere;     Knew they what that signified,     A new genesis were here.



X. CIRCLES.
The eye is the first circle; the horizon which it forms is the second;and throughout nature this primary figure is repeated without end. It isthe highest emblem in the cipher of the world. St. Augustine describedthe nature of God as a circle whose centre was everywhere and itscircumference nowhere. We are all our lifetime reading the copioussense of this first of forms. One moral we have already deduced, inconsidering the circular or compensatory character of every humanaction. Another analogy we shall now trace, that every action admits ofbeing outdone. Our life is an apprenticeship to the truth that aroundevery circle another can be drawn; that there is no end in nature, butevery end is a beginning; that there is always another dawn risen onmid-noon, and under every deep a lower deep opens.
This fact, as far as it symbolizes the moral fact of the Unattainable,the flying Perfect, around which the hands of man can never meet, atonce the inspirer and the condemner of every success, may convenientlyserve us to connect many illustrations of human power in everydepartment.
There are no fixtures in nature. The universe is fluid and volatile.Permanence is but a word of degrees. Our globe seen by God is atransparent law, not a mass of facts. The law dissolves the fact andholds it fluid. Our culture is the predominance of an idea which drawsafter it this train of cities and institutions. Let us rise into anotheridea: they will disappear. The Greek sculpture is all melted away, as ifit had been statues of ice; here and there a solitary figure or fragmentremaining, as we see flecks and scraps of snow left in cold dells andmountain clefts in June and July. For the genius that created it createsnow somewhat else. The Greek letters last a little longer, but arealready passing under the same sentence and tumbling into the inevitablepit which the creation of new thought opens for all that is old. The newcontinents are built out of the ruins of an old planet; the new racesfed out of the decomposition of the foregoing. New arts destroy the old.See the investment of capital in aqueducts made useless by hydraulics;fortifications, by gunpowder; roads and canals, by railways; sails, bysteam; steam by electricity.
You admire this tower of granite, weathering the hurts of so many ages.Yet a little waving hand built this huge wall, and that which builds isbetter than that which is built. The hand that built can topple it downmuch faster. Better than the hand and nimbler was the invisible thoughtwhich wrought through it; and thus ever, behind the coarse effect, is afine cause, which, being narrowly seen, is itself the effect of a finercause. Every thing looks permanent until its secret is known. A richestate appears to women a firm and lasting fact; to a merchant, oneeasily created out of any materials, and easily lost. An orchard, goodtillage, good grounds, seem a fixture, like a gold mine, or a river, toa citizen; but to a large farmer, not much more fixed than the stateof the crop. Nature looks provokingly stable and secular, but it hasa cause like all the rest; and when once I comprehend that, will thesefields stretch so immovably wide, these leaves hang so individuallyconsiderable? Permanence is a word of degrees. Every thing is medial.Moons are no more bounds to spiritual power than bat-balls.
The key to every man is his thought. Sturdy and defying though he look,he has a helm which he obeys, which is the idea after which all hisfacts are classified. He can only be reformed by showing him a newidea which commands his own. The life of man is a self-evolving circle,which, from a ring imperceptibly small, rushes on all sides outwards tonew and larger circles, and that without end. The extent to which thisgeneration of circles, wheel without wheel, will go, depends on theforce or truth of the individual soul. For it is the inert effortof each thought, having formed itself into a circular wave ofcircumstance,--as for instance an empire, rules of an art, a localusage, a religious rite,--to heap itself on that ridge and to solidifyand hem in the life. But if the soul is quick and strong it bursts overthat boundary on all sides and expands another orbit on the great deep,which also runs up into a high wave, with attempt again to stop and tobind. But the heart refuses to be imprisoned; in its first and narrowestpulses, it already tends outward with a vast force and to immense andinnumerable expansions.
Every ultimate fact is only the first of a new series. Every general lawonly a particular fact of some more general law presently to discloseitself. There is no outside, no inclosing wall, no circumference to us.The man finishes his story,--how good! how final! how it puts a new faceon all things! He fills the sky. Lo! on the other side rises also a manand draws a circle around the circle we had just pronounced the outlineof the sphere. Then already is our first speaker not man, but only afirst speaker. His only redress is forthwith to draw a circle outside ofhis antagonist. And so men do by themselves. The result of to-day, whichhaunts the mind and cannot be escaped, will presently be abridged intoa word, and the principle that seemed to explain nature will itself beincluded as one example of a bolder generalization. In the thought ofto-morrow there is a power to upheave all thy creed, all the creeds, allthe literatures of the nations, and marshal thee to a heaven which noepic dream has yet depicted. Every man is not so much a workman in theworld as he is a suggestion of that he should be. Men walk as propheciesof the next age.
Step by step we scale this mysterious ladder: the steps are actions; thenew prospect is power. Every several result is threatened and judged bythat which follows. Every one seems to be contradicted by the new; it isonly limited by the new. The new statement is always hated by the old,and, to those dwelling in the old, comes like an abyss of scepticism.But the eye soon gets wonted to it, for the eye and it are effects ofone cause; then its innocency and benefit appear, and presently, allits energy spent, it pales and dwindles before the revelation of the newhour.
Fear not the new generalization. Does the fact look crass and material,threatening to degrade thy theory of spirit? Resist it not; it goes torefine and raise thy theory of matter just as much.
There are no fixtures to men, if we appeal to consciousness. Every mansupposes himself not to be fully understood; and if there is any truthin him, if he rests at last on the divine soul, I see not how it canbe otherwise. The last chamber, the last closet, he must feel was neveropened; there is always a residuum unknown, unanalyzable. That is, everyman believes that he has a greater possibility.
Our moods do not believe in each other. To-day I am full of thoughts andcan write what I please. I see no reason why I should not have the samethought, the same power of expression, to-morrow. What I write, whilst Iwrite it, seems the most natural thing in the world; but yesterday Isaw a dreary vacuity in this direction in which now I see so much; anda month hence, I doubt not, I shall wonder who he was that wrote so manycontinuous pages. Alas for this infirm faith, this will not strenuous,this vast ebb of a vast flow! I am God in nature; I am a weed by thewall.
The continual effort to raise himself above himself, to work a pitchabove his last height, betrays itself in a man's relations. We thirstfor approbation, yet cannot forgive the approver. The sweet of natureis love; yet, if I have a friend I am tormented by my imperfections. Thelove of me accuses the other party. If he were high enough to slight me,then could I love him, and rise by my affection to new heights. A man'sgrowth is seen in the successive choirs of his friends. For every friendwhom he loses for truth, he gains a better. I thought as I walked in thewoods and mused on my friends, why should I play with them this gameof idolatry? I know and see too well, when not voluntarily blind, thespeedy limits of persons called high and worthy. Rich, noble and greatthey are by the liberality of our speech, but truth is sad. O blessedSpirit, whom I forsake for these, they are not thou! Every personalconsideration that we allow costs us heavenly state. We sell the thronesof angels for a short and turbulent pleasure.
How often must we learn this lesson? Men cease to interest us when wefind their limitations. The only sin is limitation. As soon as youonce come up with a man's limitations, it is all over with him. Has hetalents? has he enterprise? has he knowledge? It boots not. Infinitelyalluring and attractive was he to you yesterday, a great hope, a sea toswim in; now, you have found his shores, found it a pond, and you carenot if you never see it again.
Each new step we take in thought reconciles twenty seemingly discordantfacts, as expressions of one law. Aristotle and Plato are reckoned therespective heads of two schools. A wise man will see that Aristotleplatonizes. By going one step farther back in thought, discordantopinions are reconciled by being seen to be two extremes of oneprinciple, and we can never go so far back as to preclude a still highervision.
Beware when the great God lets loose a thinker on this planet. Then allthings are at risk. It is as when a conflagration has broken out in agreat city, and no man knows what is safe, or where it will end. Thereis not a piece of science but its flank may be turned to-morrow; thereis not any literary reputation, not the so-called eternal names offame, that may not be revised and condemned. The very hopes of man, thethoughts of his heart, the religion of nations, the manners and moralsof mankind are all at the mercy of a new generalization. Generalizationis always a new influx of the divinity into the mind. Hence the thrillthat attends it.
Valor consists in the power of self-recovery, so that a man cannot havehis flank turned, cannot be out-generalled, but put him where youwill, he stands. This can only be by his preferring truth to his pastapprehension of truth, and his alert acceptance of it from whateverquarter; the intrepid conviction that his laws, his relations tosociety, his Christianity, his world, may at any time be superseded anddecease.
There are degrees in idealism. We learn first to play with itacademically, as the magnet was once a toy. Then we see in the heydayof youth and poetry that it may be true, that it is true in gleams andfragments. Then its countenance waxes stern and grand, and we see thatit must be true. It now shows itself ethical and practical. We learnthat God is; that he is in me; and that all things are shadows of him.The idealism of Berkeley is only a crude statement of the idealism ofJesus, and that again is a crude statement of the fact that all natureis the rapid efflux of goodness executing and organizing itself. Muchmore obviously is history and the state of the world at any one timedirectly dependent on the intellectual classification then existing inthe minds of men. The things which are dear to men at this hour are soon account of the ideas which have emerged on their mental horizon, andwhich cause the present order of things, as a tree bears its apples. Anew degree of culture would instantly revolutionize the entire system ofhuman pursuits.
Conversation is a game of circles. In conversation we pluck up thetermini which bound the common of silence on every side. The parties arenot to be judged by the spirit they partake and even express under thisPentecost. To-morrow they will have receded from this high-water mark.To-morrow you shall find them stooping under the old pack-saddles. Yetlet us enjoy the cloven flame whilst it glows on our walls. When eachnew speaker strikes a new light, emancipates us from the oppression ofthe last speaker, to oppress us with the greatness and exclusiveness ofhis own thought, then yields us to another redeemer, we seem to recoverour rights, to become men. O, what truths profound and executable onlyin ages and orbs, are supposed in the announcement of every truth! Incommon hours, society sits cold and statuesque. We all stand waiting,empty,--knowing, possibly, that we can be full, surrounded by mightysymbols which are not symbols to us, but prose and trivial toys. Thencometh the god and converts the statues into fiery men, and by a flashof his eye burns up the veil which shrouded all things, and the meaningof the very furniture, of cup and saucer, of chair and clock andtester, is manifest. The facts which loomed so large in the fogs ofyesterday,--property, climate, breeding, personal beauty and the like,have strangely changed their proportions. All that we reckoned settledshakes and rattles; and literatures, cities, climates, religions, leavetheir foundations and dance before our eyes. And yet here again seethe swift circumspection! Good as is discourse, silence is better, andshames it. The length of the discourse indicates the distance ofthought betwixt the speaker and the hearer. If they were at a perfectunderstanding in any part, no words would be necessary thereon. If atone in all parts, no words would be suffered.
Literature is a point outside of our hodiernal circle through whicha new one may be described. The use of literature is to afford us aplatform whence we may command a view of our present life, a purchase bywhich we may move it. We fill ourselves with ancient learning, installourselves the best we can in Greek, in Punic, in Roman houses, only thatwe may wiselier see French, English and American houses and modes ofliving. In like manner we see literature best from the midst of wildnature, or from the din of affairs, or from a high religion. The fieldcannot be well seen from within the field. The astronomer must havehis diameter of the earth's orbit as a base to find the parallax of anystar.
Therefore we value the poet. All the argument and all the wisdom is notin the encyclopaedia, or the treatise on metaphysics, or the Body ofDivinity, but in the sonnet or the play. In my daily work I incline torepeat my old steps, and do not believe in remedial force, in the powerof change and reform. But some Petrarch or Ariosto, filled with the newwine of his imagination, writes me an ode or a brisk romance, full ofdaring thought and action. He smites and arouses me with his shrilltones, breaks up my whole chain of habits, and I open my eye on my ownpossibilities. He claps wings to the sides of all the solid old lumberof the world, and I am capable once more of choosing a straight path intheory and practice.
We have the same need to command a view of the religion of the world. Wecan never see Christianity from the catechism:--from the pastures, froma boat in the pond, from amidst the songs of wood-birds we possiblymay. Cleansed by the elemental light and wind, steeped in the sea ofbeautiful forms which the field offers us, we may chance to cast a rightglance back upon biography. Christianity is rightly dear to the bestof mankind; yet was there never a young philosopher whose breeding hadfallen into the Christian church by whom that brave text of Paul's wasnot specially prized:--"Then shall also the Son be subject unto Him whoput all things under him, that God may be all in all." Let the claimsand virtues of persons be never so great and welcome, the instinct ofman presses eagerly onward to the impersonal and illimitable, and gladlyarms itself against the dogmatism of bigots with this generous word outof the book itself.
The natural world may be conceived of as a system of concentric circles,and we now and then detect in nature slight dislocations which appriseus that this surface on which we now stand is not fixed, but sliding.These manifold tenacious qualities, this chemistry and vegetation, thesemetals and animals, which seem to stand there for their own sake, aremeans and methods only,--are words of God, and as fugitive as otherwords. Has the naturalist or chemist learned his craft, who has exploredthe gravity of atoms and the elective affinities, who has not yetdiscerned the deeper law whereof this is only a partial or approximatestatement, namely that like draws to like, and that the goods whichbelong to you gravitate to you and need not be pursued with painsand cost? Yet is that statement approximate also, and not final.Omnipresence is a higher fact. Not through subtle subterranean channelsneed friend and fact be drawn to their counterpart, but, rightlyconsidered, these things proceed from the eternal generation of thesoul. Cause and effect are two sides of one fact.
The same law of eternal procession ranges all that we call the virtues,and extinguishes each in the light of a better. The great man willnot be prudent in the popular sense; all his prudence will be so muchdeduction from his grandeur. But it behooves each to see, when hesacrifices prudence, to what god he devotes it; if to ease and pleasure,he had better be prudent still; if to a great trust, he can well sparehis mule and panniers who has a winged chariot instead. Geoffrey drawson his boots to go through the woods, that his feet may be safer fromthe bite of snakes; Aaron never thinks of such a peril. In many yearsneither is harmed by such an accident. Yet it seems to me that withevery precaution you take against such an evil you put yourself intothe power of the evil. I suppose that the highest prudence is the lowestprudence. Is this too sudden a rushing from the centre to the vergeof our orbit? Think how many times we shall fall back into pitifulcalculations before we take up our rest in the great sentiment, or makethe verge of to-day the new centre. Besides, your bravest sentiment isfamiliar to the humblest men. The poor and the low have their way ofexpressing the last facts of philosophy as well as you. "Blessed benothing" and "The worse things are, the better they are" are proverbswhich express the transcendentalism of common life.
One man's justice is another's injustice; one man's beauty another'sugliness; one man's wisdom another's folly; as one beholds the sameobjects from a higher point. One man thinks justice consists in payingdebts, and has no measure in his abhorrence of another who is veryremiss in this duty and makes the creditor wait tediously. But thatsecond man has his own way of looking at things; asks himself Which debtmust I pay first, the debt to the rich, or the debt to the poor? thedebt of money, or the debt of thought to mankind, of genius to nature?For you, O broker, there is no other principle but arithmetic. For me,commerce is of trivial import; love, faith, truth of character, theaspiration of man, these are sacred; nor can I detach one duty, likeyou, from all other duties, and concentrate my forces mechanically onthe payment of moneys. Let me live onward; you shall find that, thoughslower, the progress of my character will liquidate all these debtswithout injustice to higher claims. If a man should dedicate himself tothe payment of notes, would not this be injustice? Does he owe no debtbut money? And are all claims on him to be postponed to a landlord's ora banker's?
There is no virtue which is final; all are initial. The virtues ofsociety are vices of the saint. The terror of reform is the discoverythat we must cast away our virtues, or what we have always esteemedsuch, into the same pit that has consumed our grosser vices:--
          "Forgive his crimes, forgive his virtues too,           Those smaller faults, half converts to the right."
It is the highest power of divine moments that they abolish ourcontritions also. I accuse myself of sloth and unprofitableness day byday; but when these waves of God flow into me I no longer reckon losttime. I no longer poorly compute my possible achievement by what remainsto me of the month or the year; for these moments confer a sort ofomnipresence and omnipotence which asks nothing of duration, but seesthat the energy of the mind is commensurate with the work to be done,without time.
And thus, O circular philosopher, I hear some reader exclaim, you havearrived at a fine Pyrrhonism, at an equivalence and indifferency ofall actions, and would fain teach us that if we are true, forsooth, ourcrimes may be lively stones out of which we shall construct the templeof the true God!
I am not careful to justify myself. I own I am gladdened by seeing thepredominance of the saccharine principle throughout vegetable nature,and not less by beholding in morals that unrestrained inundation of theprinciple of good into every chink and hole that selfishness has leftopen, yea into selfishness and sin itself; so that no evil is pure, norhell itself without its extreme satisfactions. But lest I should misleadany when I have my own head and obey my whims, let me remind the readerthat I am only an experimenter. Do not set the least value on what I do,or the least discredit on what I do not, as if I pretended to settleany thing as true or false. I unsettle all things. No facts are to mesacred; none are profane; I simply experiment, an endless seeker with noPast at my back.
Yet this incessant movement and progression which all things partakecould never become sensible to us but by contrast to some principleof fixture or stability in the soul. Whilst the eternal generation ofcircles proceeds, the eternal generator abides. That central life issomewhat superior to creation, superior to knowledge and thought,and contains all its circles. For ever it labors to create a life andthought as Large and excellent as itself, but in vain, for that which ismade instructs how to make a better.
Thus there is no sleep, no pause, no preservation, but all things renew,germinate and spring. Why should we import rags and relics into the newhour? Nature abhors the old, and old age seems the only disease;all others run into this one. We call it by many names,--fever,intemperance, insanity, stupidity and crime; they are all forms of oldage; they are rest, conservatism, appropriation, inertia; not newness,not the way onward. We grizzle every day. I see no need of it. Whilstwe converse with what is above us, we do not grow old, but grow young.Infancy, youth, receptive, aspiring, with religious eye looking upward,counts itself nothing and abandons itself to the instruction flowingfrom all sides. But the man and woman of seventy assume to know all,they have outlived their hope, they renounce aspiration, accept theactual for the necessary and talk down to the young. Let them, then,become organs of the Holy Ghost; let them be lovers; let them beholdtruth; and their eyes are uplifted, their wrinkles smoothed, they areperfumed again with hope and power. This old age ought not to creep on ahuman mind. In nature every moment is new; the past is always swallowedand forgotten; the coming only is sacred. Nothing is secure but life,transition, the energizing spirit. No love can be bound by oath orcovenant to secure it against a higher love. No truth so sublime but itmay be trivial to-morrow in the light of new thoughts. People wish to besettled; only as far as they are unsettled is there any hope for them.
Life is a series of surprises. We do not guess to-day the mood, thepleasure, the power of to-morrow, when we are building up our being. Oflower states, of acts of routine and sense, we can tell somewhat; butthe masterpieces of God, the total growths and universal movements ofthe soul, he hideth; they are incalculable. I can know that truth isdivine and helpful; but how it shall help me I can have no guess, for soto be is the sole inlet of so to know. The new position of the advancingman has all the powers of the old, yet has them all new. It carries inits bosom all the energies of the past, yet is itself an exhalationof the morning. I cast away in this new moment all my once hoardedknowledge, as vacant and vain. Now, for the first time seem I to knowany thing rightly. The simplest words,--we do not know what they meanexcept when we love and aspire.
The difference between talents and character is adroitness to keep theold and trodden round, and power and courage to make a new road to newand better goals. Character makes an overpowering present; a cheerful,determined hour, which fortifies all the company by making them see thatmuch is possible and excellent that was not thought of. Character dullsthe impression of particular events. When we see the conqueror we do notthink much of any one battle or success. We see that we had exaggeratedthe difficulty. It was easy to him. The great man is not convulsible ortormentable; events pass over him without much impression. People saysometimes, 'See what I have overcome; see how cheerful I am; see howcompletely I have triumphed over these black events.' Not if they stillremind me of the black event. True conquest is the causing the calamityto fade and disappear as an early cloud of insignificant result in ahistory so large and advancing.
The one thing which we seek with insatiable desire is to forgetourselves, to be surprised out of our propriety, to lose our sempiternalmemory and to do something without knowing how or why; in short to drawa new circle. Nothing great was ever achieved without enthusiasm. Theway of life is wonderful; it is by abandonment. The great moments ofhistory are the facilities of performance through the strength of ideas,as the works of genius and religion. "A man," said Oliver Cromwell, "neverrises so high as when he knows not whither he is going." Dreamsand drunkenness, the use of opium and alcohol are the semblanceand counterfeit of this oracular genius, and hence their dangerousattraction for men. For the like reason they ask the aid of wildpassions, as in gaming and war, to ape in some manner these flames andgenerosities of the heart.
*****


     INTELLECT.
     GO, speed the stars of Thought     On to their shining goals;--     The sower scatters broad his seed,     The wheat thou strew'st be souls.



XI. INTELLECT.
Every substance is negatively electric to that which stands above itin the chemical tables, positively to that which stands below it. Waterdissolves wood and iron and salt; air dissolves water; electric firedissolves air, but the intellect dissolves fire, gravity, laws,method, and the subtlest unnamed relations of nature in itsresistless menstruum. Intellect lies behind genius, which is intellectconstructive. Intellect is the simple power anterior to all action orconstruction. Gladly would I unfold in calm degrees a natural historyof the intellect, but what man has yet been able to mark the steps andboundaries of that transparent essence? The first questions are alwaysto be asked, and the wisest doctor is gravelled by the inquisitivenessof a child. How can we speak of the action of the mind under anydivisions, as of its knowledge, of its ethics, of its works, and soforth, since it melts will into perception, knowledge into act? Eachbecomes the other. Itself alone is. Its vision is not like the vision ofthe eye, but is union with the things known.
Intellect and intellection signify to the common ear consideration ofabstract truth. The considerations of time and place, of you and me, ofprofit and hurt tyrannize over most men's minds. Intellect separates thefact considered, from you, from all local and personal reference, anddiscerns it as if it existed for its own sake. Heraclitus looked uponthe affections as dense and colored mists. In the fog of good andevil affections it is hard for man to walk forward in a straight line.Intellect is void of affection and sees an object as it stands in thelight of science, cool and disengaged. The intellect goes out of theindividual, floats over its own personality, and regards it as a fact,and not as I and mine. He who is immersed in what concerns person orplace cannot see the problem of existence. This the intellect alwaysponders. Nature shows all things formed and bound. The intellect piercesthe form, overleaps the wall, detects intrinsic likeness between remotethings and reduces all things into a few principles.
The making a fact the subject of thought raises it. All that mass ofmental and moral phenomena which we do not make objects of voluntarythought, come within the power of fortune; they constitute thecircumstance of daily life; they are subject to change, to fear, andhope. Every man beholds his human condition with a degree of melancholy.As a ship aground is battered by the waves, so man, imprisoned in mortallife, lies open to the mercy of coming events. But a truth, separated bythe intellect, is no longer a subject of destiny. We behold it as a godupraised above care and fear. And so any fact in our life, or anyrecord of our fancies or reflections, disentangled from the web of ourunconsciousness, becomes an object impersonal and immortal. It is thepast restored, but embalmed. A better art than that of Egypt has takenfear and corruption out of it. It is eviscerated of care. It is offeredfor science. What is addressed to us for contemplation does not threatenus but makes us intellectual beings.
The growth of the intellect is spontaneous in every expansion. The mindthat grows could not predict the times, the means, the mode of thatspontaneity. God enters by a private door into every individual. Longprior to the age of reflection is the thinking of the mind. Out ofdarkness it came insensibly into the marvellous light of to-day. In theperiod of infancy it accepted and disposed of all impressions from thesurrounding creation after its own way. Whatever any mind doth or saithis after a law; and this native law remains over it after it has come toreflection or conscious thought. In the most worn, pedantic, introvertedself-tormenter's life, the greatest part is incalculable by him,unforeseen, unimaginable, and must be, until he can take himself up byhis own ears. What am I? What has my will done to make me that Iam? Nothing. I have been floated into this thought, this hour, thisconnection of events, by secret currents of might and mind, and myingenuity and wilfulness have not thwarted, have not aided to anappreciable degree.
Our spontaneous action is always the best. You cannot with your bestdeliberation and heed come so close to any question as your spontaneousglance shall bring you, whilst you rise from your bed, or walk abroadin the morning after meditating the matter before sleep on the previousnight. Our thinking is a pious reception. Our truth of thought istherefore vitiated as much by too violent direction given by our will,as by too great negligence. We do not determine what we will think.We only open our senses, clear away as we can all obstruction from thefact, and suffer the intellect to see. We have little control over ourthoughts. We are the prisoners of ideas. They catch us up for momentsinto their heaven and so fully engage us that we take no thought for themorrow, gaze like children, without an effort to make them our own. Byand by we fall out of that rapture, bethink us where we have been, whatwe have seen, and repeat as truly as we can what we have beheld. Asfar as we can recall these ecstasies we carry away in the ineffaceablememory the result, and all men and all the ages confirm it. It is calledTruth. But the moment we cease to report and attempt to correct andcontrive, it is not truth.
If we consider what persons have stimulated and profited us, we shallperceive the superiority of the spontaneous or intuitive principle overthe arithmetical or logical. The first contains the second, but virtualand latent. We want in every man a long logic; we cannot pardon theabsence of it, but it must not be spoken. Logic is the procession orproportionate unfolding of the intuition; but its virtue is as silentmethod; the moment it would appear as propositions and have a separatevalue it is worthless.
In every man's mind, some images, words and facts remain, without efforton his part to imprint them, which others forget, and afterwards theseillustrate to him important laws. All our progress is an unfolding, likethe vegetable bud. You have first an instinct, then an opinion, then aknowledge, as the plant has root, bud and fruit. Trust the instinct tothe end, though you can render no reason. It is vain to hurry it. Bytrusting it to the end, it shall ripen into truth and you shall know whyyou believe.
Each mind has its own method. A true man never acquires after collegerules. What you have aggregated in a natural manner surprises anddelights when it is produced. For we cannot oversee each other'ssecret. And hence the differences between men in natural endowment areinsignificant in comparison with their common wealth. Do you think theporter and the cook have no anecdotes, no experiences, no wonders foryou? Every body knows as much as the savant. The walls of rude minds arescrawled all over with facts, with thoughts. They shall one day bring alantern and read the inscriptions. Every man, in the degree in which hehas wit and culture, finds his curiosity inflamed concerning the modesof living and thinking of other men, and especially of those classeswhose minds have not been subdued by the drill of school education.
This instinctive action never ceases in a healthy mind, but becomesricher and more frequent in its informations through all states ofculture. At last comes the era of reflection, when we not only observe,but take pains to observe; when we of set purpose sit down to consideran abstract truth; when we keep the mind's eye open whilst we converse,whilst we read, whilst we act, intent to learn the secret law of someclass of facts.
What is the hardest task in the world? To think. I would put myselfin the attitude to look in the eye an abstract truth, and I cannot. Iblench and withdraw on this side and on that. I seem to know what hemeant who said, No man can see God face to face and live. For example,a man explores the basis of civil government. Let him intend his mindwithout respite, without rest, in one direction. His best heed long timeavails him nothing. Yet thoughts are flitting before him. We all butapprehend, we dimly forebode the truth. We say I will walk abroad, andthe truth will take form and clearness to me. We go forth, but cannotfind it. It seems as if we needed only the stillness and composedattitude of the library to seize the thought. But we come in, and are asfar from it as at first. Then, in a moment, and unannounced, the truthappears. A certain wandering light appears, and is the distinction, theprinciple, we wanted. But the oracle comes because we had previouslylaid siege to the shrine. It seems as if the law of the intellectresembled that law of nature by which we now inspire, now expire thebreath; by which the heart now draws in, then hurls out the blood,--thelaw of undulation. So now you must labor with your brains, and now youmust forbear your activity and see what the great Soul showeth.
The immortality of man is as legitimately preached from theintellections as from the moral volitions. Every intellection is mainlyprospective. Its present value is its least. Inspect what delightsyou in Plutarch, in Shakspeare, in Cervantes. Each truth that a writeracquires is a lantern, which he turns full on what facts and thoughtslay already in his mind, and behold, all the mats and rubbish which hadlittered his garret become precious. Every trivial fact in his privatebiography becomes an illustration of this new principle, revisits theday, and delights all men by its piquancy and new charm. Men say, Wheredid he get this? and think there was something divine in his life. Butno; they have myriads of facts just as good, would they only get a lampto ransack their attics withal.
We are all wise. The difference between persons is not in wisdom but inart. I knew, in an academical club, a person who always deferred tome; who, seeing my whim for writing, fancied that my experiences hadsomewhat superior; whilst I saw that his experiences were as good asmine. Give them to me and I would make the same use of them. He held theold; he holds the new; I had the habit of tacking together the old andthe new which he did not use to exercise. This may hold in the greatexamples. Perhaps if we should meet Shakspeare we should not beconscious of any steep inferiority; no, but of a great equality,--onlythat he possessed a strange skill of using, of classifying, his facts,which we lacked. For notwithstanding our utter incapacity to produceanything like Hamlet and Othello, see the perfect reception this wit andimmense knowledge of life and liquid eloquence find in us all.
If you gather apples in the sunshine, or make hay, or hoe corn, and thenretire within doors and shut your eyes and press them with your hand,you shall still see apples hanging in the bright light with boughs andleaves thereto, or the tasselled grass, or the corn-flags, and this forfive or six hours afterwards. There lie the impressions on the retentiveorgan, though you knew it not. So lies the whole series of naturalimages with which your life has made you acquainted, in your memory,though you know it not; and a thrill of passion flashes light on theirdark chamber, and the active power seizes instantly the fit image, asthe word of its momentary thought.
It is long ere we discover how rich we are. Our history, we are sure,is quite tame: we have nothing to write, nothing to infer. But our wiseryears still run back to the despised recollections of childhood, andalways we are fishing up some wonderful article out of that pond; untilby and by we begin to suspect that the biography of the one foolishperson we know is, in reality, nothing less than the miniatureparaphrase of the hundred volumes of the Universal History.
In the intellect constructive, which we popularly designate by the wordGenius, we observe the same balance of two elements as in intellectreceptive. The constructive intellect produces thoughts, sentences,poems, plans, designs, systems. It is the generation of the mind, themarriage of thought with nature. To genius must always go two gifts, thethought and the publication. The first is revelation, always amiracle, which no frequency of occurrence or incessant study can everfamiliarize, but which must always leave the inquirer stupid withwonder. It is the advent of truth into the world, a form of thoughtnow for the first time bursting into the universe, a child of the oldeternal soul, a piece of genuine and immeasurable greatness. It seems,for the time, to inherit all that has yet existed and to dictate tothe unborn. It affects every thought of man and goes to fashion everyinstitution. But to make it available it needs a vehicle or art by whichit is conveyed to men. To be communicable it must become picture orsensible object. We must learn the language of facts. The most wonderfulinspirations die with their subject if he has no hand to paint them tothe senses. The ray of light passes invisible through space and onlywhen it falls on an object is it seen. When the spiritual energy isdirected on something outward, then it is a thought. The relationbetween it and you first makes you, the value of you, apparent to me.The rich inventive genius of the painter must be smothered and lostfor want of the power of drawing, and in our happy hours we should beinexhaustible poets if once we could break through the silence intoadequate rhyme. As all men have some access to primary truth, so allhave some art or power of communication in their head, but only in theartist does it descend into the hand. There is an inequality, whose lawswe do not yet know, between two men and between two moments of the sameman, in respect to this faculty. In common hours we have the same factsas in the uncommon or inspired, but they do not sit for their portraits;they are not detached, but lie in a web. The thought of genius isspontaneous; but the power of picture or expression, in the mostenriched and flowing nature, implies a mixture of will, a certaincontrol over the spontaneous states, without which no production ispossible. It is a conversion of all nature into the rhetoric of thought,under the eye of judgment, with a strenuous exercise of choice. And yetthe imaginative vocabulary seems to be spontaneous also. It does notflow from experience only or mainly, but from a richer source. Not byany conscious imitation of particular forms are the grand strokes of thepainter executed, but by repairing to the fountain-head of all forms inhis mind. Who is the first drawing-master? Without instruction we knowvery well the ideal of the human form. A child knows if an arm or a legbe distorted in a picture; if the attitude be natural or grand or mean;though he has never received any instruction in drawing or heard anyconversation on the subject, nor can himself draw with correctness asingle feature. A good form strikes all eyes pleasantly, long beforethey have any science on the subject, and a beautiful face sets twentyhearts in palpitation, prior to all consideration of the mechanicalproportions of the features and head. We may owe to dreams some lighton the fountain of this skill; for as soon as we let our will go and letthe unconscious states ensue, see what cunning draughtsmen we are! Weentertain ourselves with wonderful forms of men, of women, of animals,of gardens, of woods and of monsters, and the mystic pencil wherewith wethen draw has no awkwardness or inexperience, no meagreness or poverty;it can design well and group well; its composition is full of art, itscolors are well laid on and the whole canvas which it paints is lifelikeand apt to touch us with terror, with tenderness, with desire and withgrief. Neither are the artist's copies from experience ever mere copies,but always touched and softened by tints from this ideal domain.
The conditions essential to a constructive mind do not appear to beso often combined but that a good sentence or verse remains fresh andmemorable for a long time. Yet when we write with ease and come out intothe free air of thought, we seem to be assured that nothing is easierthan to continue this communication at pleasure. Up, down, around, thekingdom of thought has no inclosures, but the Muse makes us free of hercity. Well, the world has a million writers. One would think then thatgood thought would be as familiar as air and water, and the gifts ofeach new hour would exclude the last. Yet we can count all our goodbooks; nay, I remember any beautiful verse for twenty years. It is truethat the discerning intellect of the world is always much in advance ofthe creative, so that there are many competent judges of the bestbook, and few writers of the best books. But some of the conditions ofintellectual construction are of rare occurrence. The intellect is awhole and demands integrity in every work. This is resisted equally bya man's devotion to a single thought and by his ambition to combine toomany.
Truth is our element of life, yet if a man fasten his attention on asingle aspect of truth and apply himself to that alone for a longtime, the truth becomes distorted and not itself but falsehood; hereinresembling the air, which is our natural element, and the breath ofour nostrils, but if a stream of the same be directed on the body fora time, it causes cold, fever, and even death. How wearisome thegrammarian, the phrenologist, the political or religious fanatic, orindeed any possessed mortal whose balance is lost by the exaggerationof a single topic. It is incipient insanity. Every thought is a prisonalso. I cannot see what you see, because I am caught up by a strongwind and blown so far in one direction that I am out of the hoop of yourhorizon.
Is it any better if the student, to avoid this offence, and toliberalize himself, aims to make a mechanical whole of history, orscience, or philosophy, by a numerical addition of all the facts thatfall within his vision? The world refuses to be analyzed by addition andsubtraction. When we are young we spend much time and pains in fillingour note-books with all definitions of Religion, Love, Poetry, Politics,Art, in the hope that in the course of a few years we shall havecondensed into our encyclopaedia the net value of all the theories atwhich the world has yet arrived. But year after year our tables getno completeness, and at last we discover that our curve is a parabola,whose arcs will never meet.
Neither by detachment neither by aggregation is the integrity of theintellect transmitted to its works, but by a vigilance which brings theintellect in its greatness and best state to operate every moment. Itmust have the same wholeness which nature has. Although no diligence canrebuild the universe in a model by the best accumulation or dispositionof details, yet does the world reappear in miniature in every event,so that all the laws of nature may be read in the smallest fact. Theintellect must have the like perfection in its apprehension and in itsworks. For this reason, an index or mercury of intellectual proficiencyis the perception of identity. We talk with accomplished persons whoappear to be strangers in nature. The cloud, the tree, the turf, thebird are not theirs, have nothing of them; the world is only theirlodging and table. But the poet, whose verses are to be spheraland complete, is one whom Nature cannot deceive, whatsoever face ofstrangeness she may put on. He feels a strict consanguinity, and detectsmore likeness than variety in all her changes. We are stung by thedesire for new thought; but when we receive a new thought it is only theold thought with a new face, and though we make it our own we instantlycrave another; we are not really enriched. For the truth was in usbefore it was reflected to us from natural objects; and the profoundgenius will cast the likeness of all creatures into every product of hiswit.
But if the constructive powers are rare and it is given to few men tobe poets, yet every man is a receiver of this descending holy ghost,and may well study the laws of its influx. Exactly parallel is the wholerule of intellectual duty to the rule of moral duty. A self-denialno less austere than the saint's is demanded of the scholar. He mustworship truth, and forego all things for that, and choose defeat andpain, so that his treasure in thought is thereby augmented.
God offers to every mind its choice between truth and repose. Take whichyou please,--you can never have both. Between these, as a pendulum, manoscillates. He in whom the love of repose predominates will acceptthe first creed, the first philosophy, the first political partyhe meets,--most likely his father's. He gets rest, commodity, andreputation; but he shuts the door of truth. He in whom the love of truthpredominates will keep himself aloof from all moorings, and afloat. Hewill abstain from dogmatism, and recognize all the opposite negationsbetween which, as walls, his being is swung. He submits to theinconvenience of suspense and imperfect opinion, but he is a candidatefor truth, as the other is not, and respects the highest law of hisbeing.
The circle of the green earth he must measure with his shoes to find theman who can yield him truth. He shall then know that there is somewhatmore blessed and great in hearing than in speaking. Happy is the hearingman; unhappy the speaking man. As long as I hear truth I am bathed by abeautiful element and am not conscious of any limits to my nature. Thesuggestions are thousandfold that I hear and see. The waters of thegreat deep have ingress and egress to the soul. But if I speak, Idefine, I confine and am less. When Socrates speaks, Lysis and Menexenusare afflicted by no shame that they do not speak. They also are good.He likewise defers to them, loves them, whilst he speaks. Because a trueand natural man contains and is the same truth which an eloquent manarticulates; but in the eloquent man, because he can articulate it,it seems something the less to reside, and he turns to these silentbeautiful with the more inclination and respect. The ancient sentencesaid, Let us be silent, for so are the gods. Silence is a solvent thatdestroys personality, and gives us leave to be great and universal.Every man's progress is through a succession of teachers, each of whomseems at the time to have a superlative influence, but it at last givesplace to a new. Frankly let him accept it all. Jesus says, Leave father,mother, house and lands, and follow me. Who leaves all, receives more.This is as true intellectually as morally. Each new mind we approachseems to require an abdication of all our past and present possessions.A new doctrine seems at first a subversion of all our opinions, tastes,and manner of living. Such has Swedenborg, such has Kant, such hasColeridge, such has Hegel or his interpreter Cousin seemed to many youngmen in this country. Take thankfully and heartily all they can give.Exhaust them, wrestle with them, let them not go until their blessing bewon, and after a short season the dismay will be overpast, the excess ofinfluence withdrawn, and they will be no longer an alarming meteor, butone more bright star shining serenely in your heaven and blending itslight with all your day.
But whilst he gives himself up unreservedly to that which draws him,because that is his own, he is to refuse himself to that which draws himnot, whatsoever fame and authority may attend it, because it is nothis own. Entire self-reliance belongs to the intellect. One soul is acounterpoise of all souls, as a capillary column of water is a balancefor the sea. It must treat things and books and sovereign genius asitself also a sovereign. If Aeschylus be that man he is taken for, hehas not yet done his office when he has educated the learned of Europefor a thousand years. He is now to approve himself a master of delightto me also. If he cannot do that, all his fame shall avail him nothingwith me. I were a fool not to sacrifice a thousand Aeschyluses to myintellectual integrity. Especially take the same ground in regard toabstract truth, the science of the mind. The Bacon, the Spinoza, theHume, Schelling, Kant, or whosoever propounds to you a philosophy ofthe mind, is only a more or less awkward translator of things inyour consciousness which you have also your way of seeing, perhaps ofdenominating. Say then, instead of too timidly poring into hisobscure sense, that he has not succeeded in rendering back to you yourconsciousness. He has not succeeded; now let another try. If Platocannot, perhaps Spinoza will. If Spinoza cannot, then perhaps Kant.Anyhow, when at last it is done, you will find it is no recondite, but asimple, natural, common state which the writer restores to you.
But let us end these didactics. I will not, though the subject mightprovoke it, speak to the open question between Truth and Love. Ishall not presume to interfere in the old politics of the skies;--"Thecherubim know most; the seraphim love most." The gods shall settletheir own quarrels. But I cannot recite, even thus rudely, laws of theintellect, without remembering that lofty and sequestered class of menwho have been its prophets and oracles, the high-priesthood of the purereason, the Trismegisti, the expounders of the principles of thoughtfrom age to age. When at long intervals we turn over their abstrusepages, wonderful seems the calm and grand air of these few, thesegreat spiritual lords who have walked in the world,--these of theold religion,--dwelling in a worship which makes the sanctities ofChristianity look parvenues and popular; for "persuasion is in soul, butnecessity is in intellect." This band of grandees, Hermes, Heraclitus,Empedocles, Plato, Plotinus, Olympiodorus, Proclus, Synesius andthe rest, have somewhat so vast in their logic, so primary in theirthinking, that it seems antecedent to all the ordinary distinctions ofrhetoric and literature, and to be at once poetry and music and dancingand astronomy and mathematics. I am present at the sowing of the seed ofthe world. With a geometry of sunbeams the soul lays the foundations ofnature. The truth and grandeur of their thought is proved by its scopeand applicability, for it commands the entire schedule and inventory ofthings for its illustration. But what marks its elevation and has evena comic look to us, is the innocent serenity with which these babe-likeJupiters sit in their clouds, and from age to age prattle to each otherand to no contemporary. Well assured that their speech is intelligibleand the most natural thing in the world, they add thesis to thesis,without a moment's heed of the universal astonishment of the human racebelow, who do not comprehend their plainest argument; nor do theyever relent so much as to insert a popular or explaining sentence,nor testify the least displeasure or petulance at the dulness of theiramazed auditory. The angels are so enamored of the language that isspoken in heaven that they will not distort their lips with the hissingand unmusical dialects of men, but speak their own, whether there be anywho understand it or not.
*****


     ART.
     GIVE to barrows trays and pans     Grace and glimmer of romance,     Bring the moonlight into noon     Hid in gleaming piles of stone;     On the city's paved street     Plant gardens lined with lilac sweet,     Let spouting fountains cool the air,     Singing in the sun-baked square.     Let statue, picture, park and hall,     Ballad, flag and festival,     The past restore, the day adorn     And make each morrow a new morn     So shall the drudge in dusty frock     Spy behind the city clock     Retinues of airy kings,     Skirts of angels, starry wings,     His fathers shining in bright fables,     His children fed at heavenly tables.     'Tis the privilege of Art     Thus to play its cheerful part,     Man in Earth to acclimate     And bend the exile to his fate,     And, moulded of one element     With the days and firmament,     Teach him on these as stairs to climb     And live on even terms with Time;     Whilst upper life the slender rill     Of human sense doth overfill.



XII. ART.
Because the soul is progressive, it never quite repeats itself, butin every act attempts the production of a new and fairer whole. Thisappears in works both of the useful and the fine arts, if we employ thepopular distinction of works according to their aim either at use orbeauty. Thus in our fine arts, not imitation but creation is the aim. Inlandscapes the painter should give the suggestion of a fairer creationthan we know. The details, the prose of nature he should omit and giveus only the spirit and splendor. He should know that the landscape hasbeauty for his eye because it expresses a thought which is to him good;and this because the same power which sees through his eyes is seen inthat spectacle; and he will come to value the expression of nature andnot nature itself, and so exalt in his copy the features that pleasehim. He will give the gloom of gloom and the sunshine of sunshine. In aportrait he must inscribe the character and not the features, and mustesteem the man who sits to him as himself only an imperfect picture orlikeness of the aspiring original within.
What is that abridgment and selection we observe in all spiritualactivity, but itself the creative impulse? for it is the inlet of thathigher illumination which teaches to convey a larger sense by simplersymbols. What is a man but nature's finer success in self-explication?What is a man but a finer and compacter landscape than the horizonfigures,--nature's eclecticism? and what is his speech, his love ofpainting, love of nature, but a still finer success,--all the wearymiles and tons of space and bulk left out, and the spirit or moral ofit contracted into a musical word, or the most cunning stroke of thepencil?
But the artist must employ the symbols in use in his day and nationto convey his enlarged sense to his fellow-men. Thus the new in artis always formed out of the old. The Genius of the Hour sets hisineffaceable seal on the work and gives it an inexpressible charmfor the imagination. As far as the spiritual character of the periodoverpowers the artist and finds expression in his work, so far it willretain a certain grandeur, and will represent to future beholders theUnknown, the Inevitable, the Divine. No man can quite exclude thiselement of Necessity from his labor. No man can quite emancipate himselffrom his age and country, or produce a model in which the education,the religion, the politics, usages and arts of his times shall have noshare. Though he were never so original, never so wilful and fantastic,he cannot wipe out of his work every trace of the thoughts amidst whichit grew. The very avoidance betrays the usage he avoids. Above his willand out of his sight he is necessitated by the air he breathes and theidea on which he and his contemporaries live and toil, to share themanner of his times, without knowing what that manner is. Now that whichis inevitable in the work has a higher charm than individual talent canever give, inasmuch as the artist's pen or chisel seems to have beenheld and guided by a gigantic hand to inscribe a line in the historyof the human race. This circumstance gives a value to the Egyptianhieroglyphics, to the Indian, Chinese and Mexican idols, however grossand shapeless. They denote the height of the human soul in that hour,and were not fantastic, but sprung from a necessity as deep as theworld. Shall I now add that the whole extant product of the plasticarts has herein its highest value, as history; as a stroke drawn inthe portrait of that fate, perfect and beautiful, according to whoseordinations all beings advance to their beatitude?
Thus, historically viewed, it has been the office of art to educate theperception of beauty. We are immersed in beauty, but our eyes have noclear vision. It needs, by the exhibition of single traits, to assistand lead the dormant taste. We carve and paint, or we behold what iscarved and painted, as students of the mystery of Form. The virtue ofart lies in detachment, in sequestering one object from the embarrassingvariety. Until one thing comes out from the connection of things, therecan be enjoyment, contemplation, but no thought. Our happiness andunhappiness are unproductive. The infant lies in a pleasing trance, buthis individual character and his practical power depend on his dailyprogress in the separation of things, and dealing with one at a time.Love and all the passions concentrate all existence around a singleform. It is the habit of certain minds to give an all-excluding fulnessto the object, the thought, the word, they alight upon, and to makethat for the time the deputy of the world. These are the artists, theorators, the leaders of society. The power to detach and to magnify bydetaching is the essence of rhetoric in the hands of the orator andthe poet. This rhetoric, or power to fix the momentary eminency of anobject,--so remarkable in Burke, in Byron, in Carlyle,--the painter andsculptor exhibit in color and in stone. The power depends on the depthof the artist's insight of that object he contemplates. For every objecthas its roots in central nature, and may of course be so exhibited to usas to represent the world. Therefore each work of genius is the tyrantof the hour And concentrates attention on itself. For the time, it isthe only thing worth naming to do that,--be it a sonnet, an opera, alandscape, a statue, an oration, the plan of a temple, of a campaign, orof a voyage of discovery. Presently we pass to some other object, whichrounds itself into a whole as did the first; for example a well-laidgarden; and nothing seems worth doing but the laying out of gardens. Ishould think fire the best thing in the world, if I were not acquaintedwith air, and water, and earth. For it is the right and property ofall natural objects, of all genuine talents, of all native propertieswhatsoever, to be for their moment the top of the world. A squirrelleaping from bough to bough and making the Wood but one wide treefor his pleasure, fills the eye not less than a lion,--is beautiful,self-sufficing, and stands then and there for nature. A good balladdraws my ear and heart whilst I listen, as much as an epic has donebefore. A dog, drawn by a master, or a litter of pigs, satisfies and isa reality not less than the frescoes of Angelo. From this successionof excellent objects we learn at last the immensity of the world,the opulence of human nature, which can run out to infinitude in anydirection. But I also learn that what astonished and fascinated me inthe first work astonished me in the second work also; that excellence ofall things is one.
The office of painting and sculpture seems to be merely initial. Thebest pictures can easily tell us their last secret. The best picturesare rude draughts of a few of the miraculous dots and lines and dyeswhich make up the ever-changing "landscape with figures" amidst whichwe dwell. Painting seems to be to the eye what dancing is to the limbs.When that has educated the frame to self-possession, to nimbleness, tograce, the steps of the dancing-master are better forgotten; so paintingteaches me the splendor of color and the expression of form, and asI see many pictures and higher genius in the art, I see the boundlessopulence of the pencil, the indifferency in which the artist stands freeto choose out of the possible forms. If he can draw every thing, whydraw any thing? and then is my eye opened to the eternal picture whichnature paints in the street, with moving men and children, beggars andfine ladies, draped in red and green and blue and gray; long-haired,grizzled, white-faced, black-faced, wrinkled, giant, dwarf, expanded,elfish,--capped and based by heaven, earth and sea.
A gallery of sculpture teaches more austerely the same lesson. Aspicture teaches the coloring, so sculpture the anatomy of form. WhenI have seen fine statues and afterwards enter a public assembly, Iunderstand well what he meant who said, "When I have been reading Homer,all men look like giants." I too see that painting and sculpture aregymnastics of the eye, its training to the niceties and curiosities ofits function. There is no statue like this living man, with his infiniteadvantage over all ideal sculpture, of perpetual variety. What a galleryof art have I here! No mannerist made these varied groups and diverseoriginal single figures. Here is the artist himself improvising, grimand glad, at his block. Now one thought strikes him, now another, andwith each moment he alters the whole air, attitude and expression of hisclay. Away with your nonsense of oil and easels, of marble and chisels;except to open your eyes to the masteries of eternal art, they arehypocritical rubbish.
The reference of all production at last to an aboriginal Power explainsthe traits common to all works of the highest art,--that they areuniversally intelligible; that they restore to us the simplest statesof mind, and are religious. Since what skill is therein shown is thereappearance of the original soul, a jet of pure light, it shouldproduce a similar impression to that made by natural objects. In happyhours, nature appears to us one with art; art perfected,--the work ofgenius. And the individual, in whom simple tastes and susceptibility toall the great human influences overpower the accidents of a local andspecial culture, is the best critic of art. Though we travel the worldover to find the beautiful, we must carry it with us, or we find it not.The best of beauty is a finer charm than skill in surfaces, in outlines,or rules of art can ever teach, namely a radiation from the work of artof human character,--a wonderful expression through stone, or canvas, ormusical sound, of the deepest and simplest attributes of our nature,and therefore most intelligible at last to those souls which have theseattributes. In the sculptures of the Greeks, in the masonry of theRomans, and in the pictures of the Tuscan and Venetian masters, thehighest charm is the universal language they speak. A confession ofmoral nature, of purity, love, and hope, breathes from them all. Thatwhich we carry to them, the same we bring back more fairly illustratedin the memory. The traveller who visits the Vatican, and passes fromchamber to chamber through galleries of statues, vases, sarcophagi andcandelabra, through all forms of beauty cut in the richest materials,is in danger of forgetting the simplicity of the principles out of whichthey all sprung, and that they had their origin from thoughts and lawsin his own breast. He studies the technical rules on these wonderfulremains, but forgets that these works were not always thus constellated;that they are the contributions of many ages and many countries; thateach came out of the solitary workshop of one artist, who toiled perhapsin ignorance of the existence of other sculpture, created his workwithout other model save life, household life, and the sweet and smartof personal relations, of beating hearts, and meeting eyes; of povertyand necessity and hope and fear. These were his inspirations, and theseare the effects he carries home to your heart and mind. In proportionto his force, the artist will find in his work an outlet for his propercharacter. He must not be in any manner pinched or hindered by hismaterial, but through his necessity of imparting himself the adamantwill be wax in his hands, and will allow an adequate communication ofhimself, in his full stature and proportion. He need not cumber himselfwith a conventional nature and culture, nor ask what is the mode inRome or in Paris, but that house and weather and manner of living whichpoverty and the fate of birth have made at once so odious and so dear,in the gray unpainted wood cabin, on the corner of a New Hampshire farm,or in the log-hut of the backwoods, or in the narrow lodging where hehas endured the constraints and seeming of a city poverty, will serveas well as any other condition as the symbol of a thought which poursitself indifferently through all.
I remember when in my younger days I had heard of the wonders of Italianpainting, I fancied the great pictures would be great strangers; somesurprising combination of color and form; a foreign wonder, barbaricpearl and gold, like the spontoons and standards of the militia, whichplay such pranks in the eyes and imaginations of school-boys. I was tosee and acquire I knew not what. When I came at last to Rome and sawwith eyes the pictures, I found that genius left to novices the gay andfantastic and ostentatious, and itself pierced directly to the simpleand true; that it was familiar and sincere; that it was the old, eternalfact I had met already in so many forms,--unto which I lived; that itwas the plain you and me I knew so well,--had left at home in so manyconversations. I had the same experience already in a church at Naples.There I saw that nothing was changed with me but the place, and saidto myself--'Thou foolish child, hast thou come out hither, over fourthousand miles of salt water, to find that which was perfect to theethere at home?' That fact I saw again in the Academmia at Naples, inthe chambers of sculpture, and yet again when I came to Rome and to thepaintings of Raphael, Angelo, Sacchi, Titian, and Leonardo da Vinci."What, old mole! workest thou in the earth so fast?" It had travelledby my side; that which I fancied I had left in Boston was here inthe Vatican, and again at Milan and at Paris, and made all travellingridiculous as a treadmill. I now require this of all pictures, thatthey domesticate me, not that they dazzle me. Pictures must not be toopicturesque. Nothing astonishes men so much as common-sense and plaindealing. All great actions have been simple, and all great pictures are.
The Transfiguration, by Raphael, is an eminent example of this peculiarmerit. A calm benignant beauty shines over all this picture, and goesdirectly to the heart. It seems almost to call you by name. The sweetand sublime face of Jesus is beyond praise, yet how it disappoints allflorid expectations! This familiar, simple, home-speaking countenance isas if one should meet a friend. The knowledge of picture-dealers has itsvalue, but listen not to their criticism when your heart is touched bygenius. It was not painted for them, it was painted for you; for such ashad eyes capable of being touched by simplicity and lofty emotions.
Yet when we have said all our fine things about the arts, we mustend with a frank confession, that the arts, as we know them, are butinitial. Our best praise is given to what they aimed and promised, notto the actual result. He has conceived meanly of the resources of man,who believes that the best age of production is past. The real valueof the Iliad or the Transfiguration is as signs of power; billows orripples they are of the stream of tendency; tokens of the everlastingeffort to produce, which even in its worst estate the soul betrays. Arthas not yet come to its maturity if it do not put itself abreast withthe most potent influences of the world, if it is not practical andmoral, if it do not stand in connection with the conscience, if it donot make the poor and uncultivated feel that it addresses them with avoice of lofty cheer. There is higher work for Art than the arts. Theyare abortive births of an imperfect or vitiated instinct. Art isthe need to create; but in its essence, immense and universal, it isimpatient of working with lame or tied hands, and of making cripples andmonsters, such as all pictures and statues are. Nothing less than thecreation of man and nature is its end. A man should find in it an outletfor his whole energy. He may paint and carve only as long as he can dothat. Art should exhilarate, and throw down the walls of circumstanceon every side, awakening in the beholder the same sense of universalrelation and power which the work evinced in the artist, and its highesteffect is to make new artists.
Already History is old enough to witness the old age and disappearanceof particular arts. The art of sculpture is long ago perished to anyreal effect. It was originally a useful art, a mode of writing, asavage's record of gratitude or devotion, and among a people possessedof a wonderful perception of form this childish carving was refined tothe utmost splendor of effect. But it is the game of a rude and youthfulpeople, and not the manly labor of a wise and spiritual nation. Under anoak-tree loaded with leaves and nuts, under a sky full of eternal eyes,I stand in a thoroughfare; but in the works of our plastic arts andespecially of sculpture, creation is driven into a corner. I cannot hidefrom myself that there is a certain appearance of paltriness, as of toysand the trumpery of a theatre, in sculpture. Nature transcends all ourmoods of thought, and its secret we do not yet find. But the gallerystands at the mercy of our moods, and there is a moment when it becomesfrivolous. I do not wonder that Newton, with an attention habituallyengaged on the paths of planets and suns, should have wondered what theEarl of Pembroke found to admire in "stone dolls." Sculpture may serveto teach the pupil how deep is the secret of form, how purely the spiritcan translate its meanings into that eloquent dialect. But the statuewill look cold and false before that new activity which needs to rollthrough all things, and is impatient of counterfeits and things notalive. Picture and sculpture are the celebrations and festivities ofform. But true art is never fixed, but always flowing. The sweetestmusic is not in the oratorio, but in the human voice when it speaks fromits instant life tones of tenderness, truth, or courage. The oratoriohas already lost its relation to the morning, to the sun, and the earth,but that persuading voice is in tune with these. All works of art shouldnot be detached, but extempore performances. A great man is a new statuein every attitude and action. A beautiful woman is a picture whichdrives all beholders nobly mad. Life may be lyric or epic, as well as apoem or a romance.
A true announcement of the law of creation, if a man were found worthyto declare it, would carry art up into the kingdom of nature, anddestroy its separate and contrasted existence. The fountains ofinvention and beauty in modern society are all but dried up. A popularnovel, a theatre, or a ball-room makes us feel that we are all paupersin the alms-house of this world, without dignity, without skill orindustry. Art is as poor and low. The old tragic Necessity, which lowerson the brows even of the Venuses and the Cupids of the antique, andfurnishes the sole apology for the intrusion of such anomalous figuresinto nature,--namely, that they were inevitable; that the artist wasdrunk with a passion for form which he could not resist, and whichvented itself in these fine extravagances,--no longer dignifies thechisel or the pencil. But the artist and the connoisseur now seek in artthe exhibition of their talent, or an asylum from the evils of life.Men are not well pleased with the figure they make in their ownimaginations, and they flee to art, and convey their better sense inan oratorio, a statue, or a picture. Art makes the same effort whicha sensual prosperity makes; namely to detach the beautiful from theuseful, to do up the work as unavoidable, and, hating it, pass on toenjoyment. These solaces and compensations, this division of beauty fromuse, the laws of nature do not permit. As soon as beauty is sought, notfrom religion and love but for pleasure, it degrades the seeker. Highbeauty is no longer attainable by him in canvas or in stone, in sound,or in lyrical construction; an effeminate, prudent, sickly beauty, whichis not beauty, is all that can be formed; for the hand can never executeany thing higher than the character can inspire.
The art that thus separates is itself first separated. Art must not bea superficial talent, but must begin farther back in man. Now men do notsee nature to be beautiful, and they go to make a statue which shallbe. They abhor men as tasteless, dull, and inconvertible, and consolethemselves with color-bags and blocks of marble. They reject life asprosaic, and create a death which they call poetic. They despatch theday's weary chores, and fly to voluptuous reveries. They eat and drink,that they may afterwards execute the ideal. Thus is art vilified; thename conveys to the mind its secondary and bad senses; it stands in theimagination as somewhat contrary to nature, and struck with death fromthe first. Would it not be better to begin higher up,--to serve theideal before they eat and drink; to serve the ideal in eating anddrinking, in drawing the breath, and in the functions of life? Beautymust come back to the useful arts, and the distinction between the fineand the useful arts be forgotten. If history were truly told, if lifewere nobly spent, it would be no longer easy or possible to distinguishthe one from the other. In nature, all is useful, all is beautiful. Itis therefore beautiful because it is alive, moving, reproductive; itis therefore useful because it is symmetrical and fair. Beauty willnot come at the call of a legislature, nor will it repeat in England orAmerica its history in Greece. It will come, as always, unannounced, andspring up between the feet of brave and earnest men. It is in vain thatwe look for genius to reiterate its miracles in the old arts; it is itsinstinct to find beauty and holiness in new and necessary facts, in thefield and road-side, in the shop and mill. Proceeding from a religiousheart it will raise to a divine use the railroad, the insurance office,the joint-stock company; our law, our primary assemblies, our commerce,the galvanic battery, the electric jar, the prism, and the chemist'sretort; in which we seek now only an economical use. Is not the selfishand even cruel aspect which belongs to our great mechanical works, tomills, railways, and machinery, the effect of the mercenary impulseswhich these works obey? When its errands are noble and adequate, asteamboat bridging the Atlantic between Old and New England and arrivingat its ports with the punctuality of a planet, is a step of man intoharmony with nature. The boat at St. Petersburg, which plies along theLena by magnetism, needs little to make it sublime. When science islearned in love, and its powers are wielded by love, they will appearthe supplements and continuations of the material creation.




End of Project Gutenberg's Essays, First Series, by Ralph Waldo Emerson
*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS, FIRST SERIES ***
***** This file should be named 2944.txt or 2944.zip *****This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/9/4/2944/
Produced by Tony Adam
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editionswill be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that noone owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States withoutpermission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply tocopying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works toprotect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  ProjectGutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if youcharge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If youdo not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with therules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purposesuch as creation of derivative works, reports, performances andresearch.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may dopractically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution issubject to the trademark license, especially commercialredistribution.


*** START: FULL LICENSE ***
THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "ProjectGutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full ProjectGutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online athttp://gutenberg.org/license).

Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic works
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroyall copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by theterms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person orentity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  Seeparagraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreementand help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.  See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in thecollection are in the public domain in the United States.  If anindividual work is in the public domain in the United States and you arelocated in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you fromcopying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivativeworks based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenbergare removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the ProjectGutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works byfreely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms ofthis agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated withthe work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement bykeeping this work in the same format with its attached full ProjectGutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are ina constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, checkthe laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreementbefore downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing orcreating derivative works based on this work or any other ProjectGutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerningthe copyright status of any work in any country outside the UnitedStates.
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediateaccess to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominentlywhenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which thephrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "ProjectGutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and withalmost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away orre-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License includedwith this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derivedfrom the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it isposted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copiedand distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any feesor charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a workwith the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on thework, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and theProject Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or1.E.9.
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additionalterms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linkedto the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with thepermission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including anyword processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to ordistribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official versionposted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide acopy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy uponrequest, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or otherform.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tmLicense as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works providedthat
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm     License.  You must require such a user to return or     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days     of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tmelectronic work or group of works on different terms than are setforth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing fromboth the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and MichaelHart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact theFoundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadpublic domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tmcollection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate orcorrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectualproperty infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, acomputer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read byyour equipment.
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Rightof Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from.  If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium withyour written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you withthe defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of arefund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entityproviding it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity toreceive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copyis also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without furtheropportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHERWARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TOWARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates thelaw of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall beinterpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted bythe applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of anyprovision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordancewith this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you door cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tmwork, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to anyProject Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computersincluding obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It existsbecause of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations frompeople in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm'sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection willremain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundationand how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.

Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary ArchiveFoundation
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted athttp://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extentpermitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scatteredthroughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, emailbusiness@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contactinformation can be found at the Foundation's web site and officialpage at http://pglaf.org
For additional contact information:     Dr. Gregory B. Newby     Chief Executive and Director     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project GutenbergLiterary Archive Foundation
Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  ToSEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for anyparticular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donationmethods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronicworks.
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tmconcept of a library of electronic works that could be freely sharedwith anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed ProjectGutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarilykeep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
     http://www.gutenberg.org
This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.